<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Thomas Myers</b><br>Diversity or oral sensory neuron types in the trigeminal ganglion.</summary>

<p>Joe Breza (University of Eastern Michigan), Robin Krimm (University of Louisville)</p>
<p>The trigeminal ganglion is home to somatosensory neurons whose processes innervate the entire head and neck. To date, little is known about somatosensory neuron types that innervate the oral cavity. Here, I recorded from mechanosensitive and thermosensitive neurons innervating the oral cavity. I found that the tongue was innervated by slow adapting (SA) or rapid adapting (RA) based on their response to force, and further categorized by their conduction velocity. A subset of anterior tongue and lip mechanosensory neurons were optogenetically identified as Parvalbumin+ (Pvalb+). Pvalb+ neurons tended to be fast Aβ, rapidly adapting neurons. To examine the innervation patterns of these neurons, I labeled them at different ages and compared their patterns to other known markers for somatosensory types that innervate tongue. Pvalb+ neurons are not visible until later postnatal ages, they innervate most fungiform papillae. Pvalb+ neurons also innervated fewer filiform papillae than both Neurofilament+ and CRGP+ neurons. In addition, they have distinctive morphological characteristics compared to another later appearing somatosensory population innervating the tongue (vGlut3+ neurons). These findings lay the groundwork for understanding sensory innervation of the oral cavity.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Olivia Harris</b><br>Characterizing color vision in jumping spiders through unlearned behaviors</summary>

<p>Nuthara Jayasinghe, Jala Reed, Nathan Morehouse - University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>Jumping spiders are highly visual predators that rely on high acuity vision to capture prey. They also exhibit a wide variety of colorful signals employed in courtship. Molecular and physiological evidence suggests the existence of di-, tri-, and tetrachromacy across the family, but behavioral experiments have not interrogated the chromatic capabilities of these animals. Traditionally, evidence for color vision had relied on association-based behavioral trials to demonstrate an animal’s ability to discriminate between wavelengths. However, in many animals, including jumping spiders, such paradigms are laborious or inaccessible. To surmount this, we investigated achromatic and chromatic discrimination in two species of jumping spiders using unlearned behavioral responses. To do this, we characterized chromatic and achromatic contrast thresholds using whole-body responses as well as retinal tracking movements to video playback stimuli. This ongoing work is providing critical evidence of the perceptual abilities of these colorful animals.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Syeda Farjana Hoque</b><br>Haller’s organ functionality is critical for ticks to detect humidity and prevent dehydration</summary>

<p>Syeda Farjana Hoque, Jasmine Kennedy, Melissa Uhran, Melissa Kelley, Evan Smith, Kennan Oyen, Ayesha Benton, Pia U. Olafson, Meghan Liu, Arturo Ledezma Ramírez, Thomas Arya, Shyh-Chi Chen and Joshua B. Benoit</p>
<p>Ticks must be able to move into high humidities for water vapor uptake to replenish water stores. If their humidity sensing is impaired, ticks cannot readily move to high humidities, prompting increased death. Here, we examined the ability of American dog ticks to sense humidity by manipulating the Haller’s organ and how altered humidity detection impacts tick survival. Also, Ir93a (an ionotropic receptor linked to humidity detection) expression was examined in the Haller’s organ location (first legs). Either permanent removal or temporary blocking of the Haller’s organ impairs the ability of ticks to rest in areas with high humidity to maintain hydration. Impaired detection of humidity did not impact tick survival when individuals were held under stable, humid conditions, but variable humidity conditions (wet and dry areas) resulted in reduced survival. This increased mortality is likely a combination of increased dehydration stress and rapid utilization of energy reserves required for water vapor uptake. Ir93a is expressed highly in the first legs, suggesting that this receptor is associated with humidity detection. These studies indicate that the Haller’s organ is likely essential for humidity sensing in ticks and a lack of humidity detection lowers tick survival.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Julia K Vrtilek</b><br>Social Information in the Contact Calls of Common Vampire Bats</summary>

<p>Grace Smith-Vidaurre (Rockefeller University, University of Cincinnati) and Gerald G. Carter (The Ohio State University, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute)</p>
<p>When adult common vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) are socially isolated, they produce contact calls. These calls contain enough information for individual recognition and can attract past food-sharing partners. However, it remains unclear whether vampire bat contact calls also contain other social information. Other bat species have been shown to produce learned vocalizations that convey group identity and allow them to recognize unrelated groupmates. To identify what social information vampire bat contact calls contain, we recorded more than 800,000 contact calls made by 76 individuals from seven colonies. To determine pairwise vocal similarity, we used 27 spectral and temporal measures of calls to classify calls to bats. We then asked whether calls contained three types of social information by testing whether multivariate acoustic distance was predicted by kinship (based on known maternities and 17 microsatellite markers), familiarity (time spent together in captivity), and the strength of social bonds (rate of food sharing). Our preliminary results indicate that call similarity is higher in kin (vs nonkin), pairs from the same wild colony (vs different colonies), nonkin pairs from distant sites housed together in captivity (vs pairs that did not meet), and nonkin that share food (vs nonkin that did not). These results are consistent with vocal convergence during social bond formation.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Kelly E. Fredericksen</b><br>An anatomical study of synaptic connections from the chemosensory cortices to the mediodorsal thalamus</summary>

<p>Chad L. Samuelsen, University of Louisville</p>
<p>The mediodorsal thalamus (MD) processes and communicates information between cortical areas related to attention, valuation, and stimulus-outcome associations. Recently, we showed that neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus encode the sensory and affective properties of intraorally delivered odors, tastes, and odor-taste mixtures. Although traditional tract-tracing studies show that projections from the primary chemosensory cortices for smell and taste (piriform cortex (PC) and gustatory cortex (GC), respectively) overlap in the mediodorsal thalamus, the proportions of neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus that receive direct projections from these cortical areas remains unclear. Using an intersectional viral approach, we found that a greater proportion of neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus receive synaptic connections from the gustatory cortex than from the piriform cortex. Next, we sought to determine the role of the mediodorsal thalamus in consummatory choice. Using a two-bottle brief-access task, we measured preferences for previously experienced odors, tastes, and odor-taste mixtures. Pharmacological inactivation (NBQX) of mediodorsal thalamus significantly reduced consumption during both the odor and taste sessions and eliminated the experience-dependent odor preference for the saccharin paired odor. These anatomical and behavioral findings corroborate that the mediodorsal thalamus plays a key role in the multisensory flavor processing that guides ingestive behaviors.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>James Whitley</b><br>Integration of Cortical and Tectal Inputs in the Pulvinar Nucleus</summary>

<p>Kierra Mason: ASNB, University of Louisville; Nazratan Naeem: ASNB, University of Louisville; Sean Masterson: ASNB, University of Louisville; Arkadiusz Slusarczyk: ASNB, University of Louisville; Martha Bickford: ASNB, University of Louisville</p>
<p>Across sensory modalities, the segregation of distinct features of the sensory environment into parallel streams of information has proven a fundamental organizing principle. In the pulvinar nucleus (PUL), extensive reciprocal connections with most visual cortical areas and a lack of clearly defined cell types have made it difficult to link its anatomical organization with functional response properties. However, study of the projections from the superior colliculus (SC) to the PUL can provide a starting point for deciphering how anatomically defined components may be differentially involved in the various functions ascribed to the PUL. Using confocal microscopy, we observed a region occupying the caudal medial PUL that received highly convergent, bilateral projections from SC, whereas a region occupying the lateral PUL received only ipsilateral, topographically organized inputs from SC. Additionally, inputs to these anatomically defined regions showed a high degree of convergence with inputs from both layer 5 and layer 6 cortical neurons and displayed unique short term synaptic plasticity. Our results indicate a surprising level of convergence across anatomically defined PUL regions, highlighting its importance in integrating a diversity of visual information.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>T Christopher Brown</b><br>Critical Period Plasticity Exchanges Neurons Active in Visual Circuitry</summary>

<p>AW McGee University of Louisville</p>
<p>Abnormal visual experience during a developmental critical period can yield enduring deficits in visual function. Yet how experience-dependent plasticity alters the properties of individual neurons and composition of visual circuitry are unclear. Here we measured with calcium imaging how monocular deprivation during the critical period disrupts binocularity for thousands of neurons in visual cortex. Tracking the tuning properties of nearly a thousand neurons revealed that abnormal vision interconverts monocular and binocular neurons to alter eye dominance through the ratio of monocular neurons. In addition, some neurons more responsive to the deprived eye were silenced and previously unresponsive neurons were recruited. Thus, plasticity during the critical period adapts to recent experience by both altering the tuning properties of responsive neurons and exchanging neurons active in visual circuitry.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Milad Ahmed</b><br>Study of cAMP signaling dynamics in Trypanosoma cruzi life cycle</summary>

<p>Miguel Chiurillo and Noelia Lander</p>
<p>The purpose of the current study is to investigate cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling dynamics in Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease. This parasite differentiates into four developmental stages to complete its life cycle within an insect vector and a mammalian host. Consequently, the parasite faces extreme environmental changes. The response to these changes is mediated by signal transduction pathways. cAMP is a universal second messenger and previous studies have shown that cAMP levels increase during T. cruzi metacyclogenesis, suggesting a role in T. cruzi differentiation. We used a genetically encoded red fluorescent cAMP indicator (R-FlincA) to generate a cAMP biosensor cell line in T. cruzi. The PCR amplified R-FlincA was subcloned into the T. cruzi expression vector pTREX-n and constructs were used to transfect T. cruzi epimastigotes. Resistant populations were selected and RFlicA expression was confirmed by western blot. We are currently measuring the intracellular cAMP levels in these cell lines under different experimental conditions, using fluorometry and flow cytometry techniques. Subsequently, we will use this biosensor to identify cAMP signaling domains in different developmental stages of the parasite. We anticipate that our results will provide new insights into the role of cAMP in T. cruzi life cycle.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Dr. Anca Ralescu</b><br>P300-based Brain Computer Interface for the Control of an Assistive Robo</summary>

<p>Madhav Lolla, Sreekar Puchala, Sameer Jadhav, Anh Nguyen, Tian Tan</p>
<p>Brain-computer interface (BCI) systems involving non-invasive Electroencephalography (EEG) are designed to stimulate task-specific electrical signals, analyse, and recognize patterns generated in conjunction with a cognitive task. These patterns can then be used to instruct a physical device (e.g., wheelchairs or robotic systems) to carry out a particular action. Among several BCI paradigms are those based on a positive deflection stimulated and observed in a person's EEG (P300) - generated after they successfully detect a target stimulus presented among concurrent non-target stimuli. While P300-based systems have been employed successfully in spelling tasks, the nature of these experiments facilitates their application in assistive robotic systems designed to carry out tasks such as navigating, grasping, and delivering objects. In this research, we design a P300-based BCI system that can navigate an assistive robot efficiently in an indoor setting. Utilising computer vision, our robot is capable at detecting, identifying objects, grasping, lift, and deliver them to the user. In conjunction with this, we have designed an efficient navigation plan for the robot tailored to the context of target object detection and grasping. We also discuss the implementation of an AI system, a knowledge base of relevant information for objects and locations of interest in the physical space.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Melissa Kelley</b><br>The loss of a microbiome-derived tRNA modification leads to a phenotype that alters predation of the mosquito Aedes aegypti</summary>

<p>Shubham Rathore (University of Cincinnati), Melissa Uhran (University of Cincinnati), Elke K. Buschbeck (University of Cincinnati), Joshua B. Benoit (University of CincinnatiC)</p>
<p>Transfer RNA (tRNA) bring the amino acid to the ribosome during protein synthesis. Chemical modifications to tRNA are required for proper functioning and accurate translation of messenger RNA codons. Modification to the anticodon influences decoding of codons by the tRNA and thus directly affects protein synthesis. Queuosine (Q) is an anticodon modification required for decoding codons of four amino acids. Q is synthesized in bacteria and eukaryotes have enzymes to salvage it from their microbiome. In mosquitoes, the microbiome affects immune response, environmental changes, and reproduction. Given mosquitoes are unable to synthesize Q, we hypothesized that the microbiome is critical to the maintenance of Q levels. Here, we show that growth of mosquito larvae with a microbiome of only E. coli lacking Q (∆queA) leads to lower Q levels in larval tRNA. Furthermore, we demonstrate that there are phenotypic effects on the coloration of ∆queA larvae. Lower Q levels correlate with less pigmentation and likely melanin which is critical to mosquito physiology. Lastly, we evaluate the effects on predation of mosquito larvae by the sunburst diving beetle (Thermonectus marmoratus). Overall, we show that the microbiome composition affects tRNA modification levels which affects phenotypes that alter predation of mosquito larvae.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Dilini Karunappuli Herath Mudiyanselage</b><br>Odorant dose-response curves of Drosophila mojavensis olfactory neurons and the divergence of host preference behavior</summary>

<p>John E. Layne, Stephanie M. Rollmann, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA</p>
<p>Animal habitats may contain heterogeneities in important factors such as the plants that are locally available. Animals that specialize on these plants may encounter different plant-derived sensory cues in different locales. Evolutionary adaptation to different plant cues may result in evolutionary divergence, reproductive isolation, and speciation. Divergent traits include behavioral preference for local plants and sensitivity to plant cues in the peripheral nervous system. The cues and sensations involved are primarily chemical and olfactory, the latter initiated by olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) that express odorant receptor genes. The cactophilic fly Drosophila mojavensis occurs as four geographically isolated populations in the deserts of southwestern North America. Each population is an obligate specialist that feeds and breeds on one of four different cactus species. A model for incipient speciation, D. mojavensis has been studied for their olfactory responses (behavioral and neuro-sensory) to odorants, especially cactus-derived volatiles. This revealed differences between the populations in OSN sensitivity which are hypothesized to have arisen due to variation in receptor expression or amino acid sequence, each of which are major ways for species to evolve divergence in sensory capability and behavior. In the present study we characterize the differential sensitivity – adaptive divergence – of D. mojavensis OSNs to a range of concentrations of stimulus odorants, rather than the more typical single concentration. The resulting dose-response curves provide a more definitive measure, compared to single concentrations, of the amount, direction and even the existence of any potential divergence, indicated by a left- or rightward shift of the curve. Also, the slope of the curve shows the binding affinity of the OSNs, which may provide a hint as to the mechanistic cause of the divergence, e.g., difference in receptor expression levels, difference in receptor amino acid sequences.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>1: <b>Sophia Clemen</b><br>Testing for individually-recognizable vocal signatures in Northern Bobwhite quail</summary>

<p>Sanjay Prasher (graduate student), Claire O’Connell (graduate student), Elizabeth Hobson (principal investigator)</p>
<p>The Northern Bobwhite quail, Colinus virginianus, is a species of great conservation concern, with Ohio populations experiencing greater than a 97% decrease in numbers since the 1970’s. Wild populations in Ohio are currently monitored with automated sound recording units. Our goal is to test whether male “bob-white” calls are individually distinctive and could be used to better estimate population sizes, habitat fidelity, and movement patterns. Previous studies have shown that Bobwhite quail differ in the structure of their separation calls, but whether the loud territoriality calls are individually distinctive is unknown. To test this, we recorded calls from 12-20 male Bobwhite which were placed in individual sound recording chambers. We analyzed: (1) whether male “bob-white” calls were consistent within individuals and (2) whether calls were distinctive across individuals. We analyzed characteristics of call spectrograms using the R package warbleR. Results of this study could have strong conservation implications and could be used to better understand and manage threatened populations of wild quail.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Zachary Whiddon</b><br>Structural remodeling of peripheral taste neurons is fast and independent of taste cell turnover</summary>

<p>Aaron McGee, Robin Krimm</p>
<p>Taste receptor cells are constantly replaced in taste buds as old cells die and new cells migrate in from a pool of progenitors at the base of each bud. The perception of taste relies on new receptor cells integrating with existing neural circuitry, yet how these new cells connect with a taste neuron is unknown. Do taste neurons seek out new taste cells in the bud? Or is the axonal arbor of taste neurons fixed and taste cells migrate to replace older cells or contact the axon at a new location? We measured the motility and branching of individual taste receptive arbors, the portion of the axon innervating taste buds, over time with two-photon in vivo microscopy. Terminal branches of taste receptive arbors continuously and rapidly remodel within the taste bud. This remodeling is faster than predicted by taste bud cell renewal. However, taste receptive arbors did enter a new taste bud in longitudinal imaging studies lasting 100 days. Surprisingly, ablating new taste cells with chemotherapeutic agents revealed that remodeling of the terminal branches of taste receptive arbors does not rely of the renewal of taste bud cells. Thus, taste buds are innervated by a stable number of taste neurons that are constantly remodeling their branching patterns independent of taste cell turnover. This axonal structural plasticity provides a mechanism for the continuity of function for taste neurons.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Joshua Carlson</b><br>Study of putative cAMP effectors in Trypanosoma cruzi</summary>

<p>Aqsa Raja, Miguel Chiurillo, and Noelia Lander (Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Chagas disease is endemic in the Americas where it affects 8 million people, with no vaccines or effective treatments for the chronic phase of the disease. Its etiological agent, Trypanosoma cruzi, is a protozoan parasite with a complex life cycle, involving a mammalian host and an insect vector. In response to microenvironmental changes, T. cruzi differentiates into four developmental forms. Signaling cascades, including the cAMP pathway, sense these changes and trigger parasite differentiation. Canonical cAMP effectors are either absent or cAMP unresponsive in trypanosomes. Studying putative cAMP effectors is crucial to elucidate the role of this pathway in environmental sensing. In this study we are investigating the role of four putative cAMP effectors in T. cruzi: cAMP response proteins 1 and 3 (CARP1, CARP3), a regulatory subunit of Protein Kinase A-like protein (PKAr-like), and Flagellar Membrane Protein 6 (FLAM6). Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology we generated mutant cell lines where each protein was endogenously tagged, and CARPs were knocked out. Gene editing and protein expression was verified by PCR and western blot, while localization was analyzed by confocal microscopy. Further characterization of mutants is currently in progress. Our results will provide key information on the possible role of cAMP effectors in trypanosomes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Lauren R. Brunner</b><br>Let’s get physical: Physical Enrichment Alters Male Mouse Perception of Courtship Rejection Vocalizations</summary>

<p>Aejah M. Van Dyke, Tuskegee University; Dr. Laura M. Hurley, Indiana University</p>
<p>Both sensory and motor environmental enrichment (EE) are often employed in laboratory settings in order to improve animal welfare through promoting more naturalistically complex environments. However, few studies have explored the effects of EE on social communication. Here, we evaluate the effects of both social and physical enrichment on the perception of negatively valenced vocal signals in male house mice. During courtship interactions, female mice produce broadband vocalizations (BBVs, or squeaks), which can be associated with courtship rejection. Male mice produce prosocial USVs in courtship interactions and decrease their USV output in response to BBV playback. In this study, we used a 2x2 experimental design in which mice were either in social housing (S+) or isolated housing (S-), and either physically enriched housing (P+), or physically deprived housing (P-) for four weeks, creating four distinct groups with varying levels of social and physical enrichment: S+P+, S+P-, S-P+, and S-P-. Mice then underwent a split cage paradigm in which limited contact with a female mouse was allowed through a plexiglass barrier for fifteen minutes during which they were exposed to 5 minutes of silence (baseline), 5 minutes of BBV playback, and another 5 minutes of silence (recovery). USV production was measured to gauge perception of the BBVs. There was a significant effect of both social and physical enrichment level on baseline USV production, with P+ increasing and S+ decreasing baseline USV production. Mice exposed to physical enrichment, regardless of their social enrichment level, also produced significantly longer USVs than physically deprived mice. Physical enrichment also altered mouse perception of courtship rejection signals and the trajectory of vocal behavior during and after BBV playback, with P+ causing a decreased response to playback and decreased recovery after playback. Surprisingly, social treatment did not significantly affect these measurements, suggesting that physical enrichment powerfully alters mouse perception and vocal production in a social interaction, while social enrichment alone does not.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Michaela Rogers</b><br>Paternal exposure to novel predator cues reduces offspring survival in threespined stickleback</summary>

<p>Jennifer Hellmann</p>
<p>Climate change induces rapid changes to the environment such as introducing invasive species. Organisms can cope through transgenerational plasticity (TGP), occurring when parental experiences influence offspring phenotypes. TGP can prime offspring for future environments, but it is less known how parents use sensory cues to detect environmental shifts (i.e. increased predation). Individuals may rely on one cue (e.g. visual, olfactory) or use different cues simultaneously. I exposed threespined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) males to cues of a novel trout predator prior to fertilization for 10 days. I examined paternal behavior pre and post-exposure, and measured MHC expression with qPCR. MHC expression can reflect condition: sticklebacks with high MHC expression have worse condition and more stress. I generated offspring after the last exposure with IVF and tested them for antipredator behavior and survival against a live predator. Fathers exposed to visual cues oriented more to and spent time closer to the novel predator post-exposure on day one; MHC analysis is ongoing. Further, offspring survival decreased if fathers received visual cues. The visual cue was the only cue to elicit a change in paternal behavior and have a transgenerational effect on offspring, suggesting its importance for the recognition of novel predators in sticklebacks.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Jenny Yi-Ting Sung</b><br>Where, when, and who to court: ecological interactions and facial diversification of four species of syntopic paradise jumping spiders</summary>

<p>David J. Morris, University of Cincinnati; David Outomuro, University of Pittsburgh; Nathan I. Morehouse, University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>During courtship, animals face the challenge of communicating their identity or status to the appropriate audience, e.g., viable, receptive mates. The costs of being misidentified can often be high, ranging from wasted energy and reproductive resources to loss of life, as seen in precopulatory sexual cannibalism in spiders. So what traits do animals rely on to communicate their species identity? In paradise jumping spiders (genus /Habronattus/), males flaunt colorful and distinctive species-specific facial patterns. We hypothesized that male /Habronattus/ faces may contribute to communicating species identity, and these faces may have diversified in response to reinforcement selection. In this study, we characterized the spatiotemporal niche partitioning and male facial patterns of 4 syntopic /Habronattus/ species. We predicted that species with less niche partitioning (i.e., higher likelihood of interspecific interactions) would exhibit greater divergence in male facial patterns. First, we evaluated niche partitioning by quantifying habitat usage, spatiotemporal distribution and overlap, and interactions of spiders at the Edge of Appalachia Nature Preserve, Ohio. Next, we quantified spider facial patterns using hyperspectral imaging techniques. Lastly, we examined the relationship between spatiotemporal niche partitioning and facial pattern divergence. We discuss the results in the context of likely ecological and behavioral reproductive isolation in this syntopic community.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Aaron Hamrick</b><br>Olfactory Differences Among Closely Related Cactophilic Drosophila Species</summary>

<p>Stephanie M. Rollmann and John E. Layne</p>
<p>Evolutionary divergence of behavioral traits during adaptation to changes in the environment has been well documented in many animals. This divergence is often manifested in sensory systems, for instance, changes in the available host plants leads to shifts in behavioral preference of the insects that exploit them, and changes in the olfactory system that the insects use to identify and locate them. Some progress has been made in understanding the neural basis of such sensory modifications, both within and between Drosophila species. Shifts in host plants have been shown to correspond with changes in the sensitivity and selectivity of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) to odor cues and/or changes in the number of select subtypes of OSNs. However, the extent to which such changes are lineage-specific, and thus due more to ancestry than to adaptation, remains to be determined. This research examines odorant responses by OSNs in six closely related pairs of Drosophila species from the Drosophila repleta group that feed and breed on cactus. Results indicate marked differences in neurophysiological response from several study species who have shifted host plant preference from the ancestral cactus – prickly pear – to columnar cactus, or to both the ancestral and new type of cactus, i.e., they have become polymorphic.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Tim Elmo Feiten</b><br>What Role does the Concept of Umwelt play in Sensory Ecology?</summary>

<p></p>
<p>Jakob von Uexküll (1864 – 1944) coined the concept of Umwelt to talk about the different worlds experienced by animals according to their specific sensory and motor capabilites. He had an important influence on ethology, partly through the work of Konrad Lorenz, and the term Umwelt is still used today in some fields of biology. I want to find out two things: a) How prevalent is the term Umwelt among sensory ecologists today and what do they take it to mean? b) What role does the subjective experience of animals play for sensory ecology in general? My poster poses these two questions to the scientists present at Sensorium 2022 and serves as a general invitation for dialogue about the status of subjective experience in the study of behavior, sensation, and environments. To provide some more structure for possible conversations, the poster summarizes two main lines of historical disagreement about Uexküll’s thought: Do Umwelten belong to individual organisms or to entire species? And is an Umwelt selected from a larger set of pre-existing elements or is it actively constructed by the living subject?</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Sanjay Prasher</b><br>Exploring the factors underlying social competency in foragers using an agent-based model</summary>

<p>Elizabeth A. Hobson, University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>Social connectedness allows animals to benefit from conspecifics (e.g., by gaining valuable information from knowledgeable individuals). Socially competent animals should affiliate more with informed individuals to increase the chances of benefiting from their activity. We used an agent-based model to evaluate how access to a food resource impacts an informed agent’s social centrality when conspecifics have varying degrees of social competence. We modeled foraging on a food patch, which only an informed individual can activate, and tested how attention (probability of perceiving successful foragers), preference (probability of approaching successful foragers), and memory (number of time steps remembered) affected foraging success. To understand whether these parameters may underlie social competency, we compared the foraging success of non-producers and the producer’s strength in a proximity network between simulations with different combinations of parameter values. This modeling approach will serve as a useful tool in understanding the potential cognitive mechanisms underlying social competency and producing predictions for empirical work.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Robert Lundy</b><br>Central Amygdala Somatostatin Expressing Neurons Projecting to NST are GABAergic</summary>

<p>Jane Bartonjo</p>
<p>The nucleus of solitary tract (NST) and parabrachial nucleus (PBN) represent the first and second central synapses of ascending gustatory information. Neural processing in these nuclei is influenced by descending input from forebrain regions such as the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA). In mice, we have shown that somatostatin (Sst) expressing neurons of CeA (CeA/Sst) that project to NST and PBN are largely distinct cell populations and optogenetic inhibition of the CeA/Sst-to-NST subpopulation increases the intake of high concentrations of quinine, a taste stimulus that is usually considered aversive. The synaptic connectivity of this cell population is required to understand the possible mechanisms underlying these behavioral responses. Our lab has previously demonstrated that CeA/Sst terminals within the PBN expressed GABA and made synaptic contacts, largely, with non-GABAergic neural elements. To determine whether CeA/Sst terminals within the NST also express GABA, we used electron microscopy combined with cre-dependent anterograde transported virus injections (AAV9-DIO-dApex2) into the CeA of Sst-cre mice and post-embedding immunogold labelling for GABA. We found that majority of CeA/Sst terminals in NST express GABA and synapsed with non-GABAergic neural targets. These results suggest that CeA/Sst cells provide monosynaptic input to second order NST projection neurons (non-GABAergic) and this direct feedback inhibition is necessary for appropriate responding to bitter taste quality.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Amartya Tashi Mitra</b><br>Exploring the architecture of a complex lens</summary>

<p>Shubham Rathore; Elke Buschbeck (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>One of the most important features of eyes are lenses, structures which focus light precisely onto the retina. The process of lens development is well documented in vertebrates, in which the lens is a cellular structure that grows in layers. However, even though morphologically similar, insect lenses are made of secreted proteins, and how these are integrated to form a functional lens remains relatievely unexplored. To investigate how specific lens proteins contribute to accurate lens construction, we used RNAi to knock down lens3, a key lens protein of the visually guided predatory larvae of sunburst diving beetles, Thermonectus marmoratus. These are the only known extant organism with bifocal lenses, and lens3 is known to be expressed in lens producing cells. Knock-downs lead to cataract-like opacities, as well as deformities in lens architecture which we assess at the ultrasctructural level. Based on optical asessments we find that loss of lens3 affects the sharpness of images produced by isolted lenses, as well as the focusing capabilities of intact larval eyes. Ongoing behavioural studies further asess the potential impact on hunting success. This study represents a first step towards understanding how a complex insect lens is formed to support well-focusing eyes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Deniz Korman</b><br>Stereopsis in a miniature world: Modeling the potential for stereopsis in hunting spiders</summary>

<p>Nathan I. Morehouse</p>
<p>The ability to perceive the spatial structure of one's environment is an integral part of vision. As such, most sighted animals possess the ability to extract depth information via their eyes. Yet, our understanding of depth perception is mostly limited to vertebrate, and largely primate systems. Hunting spiders present an opportune system to expand our understanding of depth perception to invertebrates. Equipped with 4 pairs of camera eyes and unmatched spatial resolution for animals their size, hunting spiders can navigate 3D environments, plan detours, and catch prey from a distance with precise lunges. These behaviors require acute spatial information, but we know very little about how these spiders perceive depth. In particular, the use of stereopsis by hunting spiders has been largely dismissed; their closely-positioned eyes (<< 1cm separation) are assumed to limit the utility of binocular disparity. However, binocular disparity is dictated by viewing distance, as well as eye separation, and the common dismissal fails to account for the short distances at which these miniature animals interact with their environment. We modeled the binocular disparity between eye-pairs of different hunting spider families viewing targets at behaviorally relevant distances. Our results indicated that some spider species have visual systems that allow them to utilize stereopsis and obtain precise depth information, whereas others do not have high enough acuity to detect small disparities. In fact, the binocular disparities for the stereoscopic species were comparable to those of toads, another non-primate system known to utilize stereopsis. This is a first step in our ongoing efforts to explain depth perception across hunting spiders through morphological and behavioral studies.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>2: <b>Michael Meece</b><br>Exploring specific infrared light wavelengths for neural recovery</summary>

<p>Elke Buschbeck, Thiane Thiam, Ngozi Okeke</p>
<p>It has previously been shown that long-wavelength light in the near-infrared to infrared range can promote healing of damaged tissue. While poorly understood, this is likely mediated by modulation of metabolic activity relating to the rate of ATP production. Retinal degeneration and recovery are powerful models in which to study this phenomenon. Biochemical assays have shown that 810 nm and 950 nm light can increase or decrease the production rate of ATP respectively. However, the impact of these wavelengths on retinal health has not been assessed. We investigated the recovery of the retina in White (w1118) mutant Drosophila melanogaster following a regime of light-induced damage and subsequent repeated exposure to either 810 nm or 950 nm light. Retinal health was examined electrophysiologically via electroretinography and by investigating the retinal ultrastructure. We found that 810 nm light promoted retinal recovery, whereas 950 nm light impeded recovery. These findings are consistent with previous implications about the importance of ATP in the recovery of damaged tissues and highlight how modulation with highly specific wavelength bands can have very different effects on neural health.</p>

</details>
