<details>
  <summary>09:00. <b>Kristina Fialko</b><br>Building visual signal diversity by discrete modifications of color and motion</summary>

<p>fialko@uchicago.edu</p>
<p>University of Chicago</p>
<p>Color and pattern are often used in conspecific signaling, but these traits are rarely presented statically. Movement in the form of display behavior is often used during communication and should be integrated in analysis of color and pattern. Displays are typically viewed as more malleable than color and pattern because they can be modified to immediate conditions. Here, I assess the extent to which color patches and displays have co-evolved by conducting a comparative study of aggression displays in 12 species of Old World warblers. Using a combination of high-speed videography and stimulated territorial intrusion experiments, I studied the use of wing movements in several different contexts. Contrary to expectation, I found that the major display remains unvaried across species and contexts, despite interspecific variation in quantity and location of color patches Although displays seem to be essentially the same, there are several exceptions that suggest coevolution of display and patch in response to environmental pressures.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:15. <b>Ryan Lunn</b><br>Assessing Canada Goose avoidance behavior to lights tuned to their visual system</summary>

<p>rlunn@purdue.edu</p>
<p>Esteban Fernandez-Juricic (Purdue University); Brad Blackwell  (USDA APHIS)</p>
<p>Birds rely on antipredator behavior to avoid approaching vehicles, like aircraft. When approached by very fast threats such as aircraft, animals must detect and then escape at longer distances to ensure adequate time to avoid an impending collision. One potential solution to increasing the distance at which an animal detects an approaching aircraft is through the use of onboard lighting systems, which have been shown to lead to earlier reactions in some bird species. Importantly, avian vision differs substantially from human vision, particularly in terms of color (wavelength) perception. We used information on the visual system of the Canada Goose to develop a light stimulus of high chromatic contrast, based our knowledge of retinal photoreceptor types, densities, and distribution. Then we ran controlled behavioral experiments, a single-choice test, to understand the responses of Canada geese to lighting treatments (blue, red) and frequencies (steady, pulsing at 2 Hz). Wavelength indeed had a significant effect on the probability avoidance with Canada geese tending to away from the blue light treatment and towards the red light treatment. Additionally, it appears the pulsing light treatment enhanced avoidance response in high ambient light conditions whereas the animals had a higher probability of avoidance in response to the steady light treatment in to the dim ambient light conditions. Our results have implications for onboard lighting design aimed at mitigating bird strikes with the Canada goose, as this species is deemed of high concern due to the safety and economic consequences of bird strikes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:30. <b>Audrey E Miller</b><br>Generating 3-dimensional multispectral models to study dynamic visual signals in animals.</summary>

<p>audreyem@princeton.edu</p>
<p>Benedict G Hogan (Princeton University); Mary Caswell Stoddard (Princeton University)</p>
<p>Animal visual signals are often complex and dynamic. Many visual signals combine aspects of color and pattern with motion in elaborate behavioral displays, adding both spatial and temporal variability to animal color. Despite the recognized importance of spatio-temporal dynamics in animal visual displays, color is frequently treated as a static trait. To understand color signal evolution, it is crucial to capture these spatial and temporal dimensions in our analyses. Technological constraints of current methods limit our ability to analyze colorful visual signals in motion, often leading to the separation of color and behavior in studies of animal signals. Advancements in imaging technologies and the closer integration of fields within ecology and computer science offer new opportunities to characterize dynamic colorful displays in a more comprehensive way. By combining multispectral imaging with photogrammetry and 3D animation, we could analyze these displays in a virtual environment using continuous measures of color that integrate behavior. A key step in developing these virtual methods is creating animatable 3D models with accurate—receiver-specific—color information. Here, we outline a workflow for generating color-accurate 3D models—what we call “3D multispectral models”—and discuss future applications for studying dynamic animal color.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:45. <b>Thinh H. Nguyen</b><br>Modeling sensorimotor behavior in echolocating bats with machine learning.</summary>

<p>nguye2t7@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Dieter Vanderelst (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Computational models of animal behavior can test hypotheses and reveal limitations in knowledge or understanding. While simulation is a valuable tool, modeling complex sensory behavior is often complicated by the need to select values for unknown model parameters. Moreover, realistically simulating the sensory input experienced by animals is far from trivial. In our computational work on echolocation in bats, we are currently exploring whether machine learning can aid in automatically selecting parameters for models of sensorimotor behavior. We tasked a simulated agent (bat) with moving around an arena constructed of vegetation-like obstacles and approaching objects labeled as food. We postulated bats can successfully forage by appropriately switching between two sensorimotor loops. Using the current sensory input, a neural network activate the governing sensorimotor loop between the two, allowing for a complex mapping between sensory input and actions. We used reinforcement learning to parametrize the neural network. To ensure the acoustic veracity of our simulation environment, we use acoustic data collected using a physical sonar sensor to supply the simulator with a realistic acoustic model of a complex environment. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using automatic parameter selection in simulation while maintaining the realism of the modeled sensory input.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>01:30. <b>Klara Katarina Nordén</b><br>All that glitters is not gold</summary>

<p>knorden@princeton.edu</p>
<p>Mary Caswell Stoddard (Princeton University)</p>
<p>Some structural colors in nature are frequently described as giving a metallic sheen - for example hummingbird plumage, jewel beetles and Morpho butterflies. The types of structures underlying these colors include thin-films and photonic crystals. While much attention has been focused on describing the often shifting hues of these structures, there has been no attempt to explain why they appear metallic. We argue that the metallic appearance of some structural colors arise from a combination of two factors: a very low diffuse reflection and a colored specular reflection. This type of reflection is found in metals and is distinct from other material reflections in nature. We suggest that some of the ambiguity surrounding the term "iridescent structural color" can be traced to the frequent confounding of metallic colors with another usage of iridescence: a hue shift with viewing angle. Here, we give metallic a precise meaning distinct from a change in hue with viewing angle. We analyze the reflectance of structurally and pigmentary colored bird plumage and show that some structures that fit our definition of metallic are known to vary little in hue with viewing angle, and some structures that are known to exhibit a pronounced hue shift are not metallic. By separating these two aspects, we simultaneously clarify terminology in structural colors and open up many new interesting questions regarding the perception of metallic colors in animals.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>01:45. <b>Justin Remmell</b><br>Inhibition, not excitation, generates functional diversity between OFF-bipolar cells in the mouse retina</summary>

<p>jdremm01@louisville.edu</p>
<p>Bart Borghuis</p>
<p>In the vertebrate retina, bipolar cells transmit visual information from rod and cone photoreceptors to retinal ganglion cells, which then signal this information to central targets in the brain. The murine bipolar cell population comprises 15 distinct cell types based on genetic expression, morphological characteristics, and light-evoked responses. Functional diversity across bipolar cell types is important and establishes parallel signaling pathways – ‘ON’, ‘OFF’, transient, and sustained that are maintained at subsequent synaptic stages. Yet exactly how different the response properties of identified bipolar cell types are, and what the mechanisms are that generate these differences, remains unclear. For example, it is not known how diverse bipolar cell types encode specific aspects of the visual scene such as temporal contrast and ambient light levels (i.e., luminance). Functional divergence of bipolar cell responses may be due to differences in excitatory or inhibitory signaling from presynaptic partners in a luminance-dependent, cell-type specific manner. To investigate this, we utilized an intact, whole-mount preparation and two-photon fluorescence imaging to target two genetically identified OFF bipolar cell types: one reportedly sustained, BC2, and one reportedly transient, BC4 (Syt2_GFP and Htr2a_EGFP transgenic mouse lines, respectively). Luminance-dependent excitatory and inhibitory inputs were measured using whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiological recordings. Light-evoked responses were evoked with visual stimuli at increasing luminance levels. Our data show that the light-evoked excitatory drive on to BC2 and BC4 cells was nearly identical whereas the recorded inhibition on to each type was markedly distinct. This shows that light-evoked inhibition, and not excitation, drives functional diversity between these two bipolar cell types. These results further emphasize the significance of synaptic inhibition in shaping diverse neuronal responses in the early visual system.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:00. <b>Ruma Chatterji</b><br>What is “Front and Center” in a Fiddler Crab’s Spatial Perception?</summary>

<p>chattera@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>John E. Layne (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Path integration is a navigation mechanism whereby animals recall their starting point by continuously measuring distances and directions of their movements which are summed to form a single memory-stored vector. This home vector must be stored using some form of coordinates, which establish a frame of reference for the vector, and thus, the animal. Foraging fiddler crabs return to their burrows using this vector-based navigation strategy. While encoding the vector’s length in memory is conceptually straightforward, encoding its direction requires some reference against which the direction is recorded. Put simply, the open question is, what is “front and center” in an animal’s spatial cognition? The most obvious answer is that the vector’s direction is anchored to the animals’ own body axis, but there is reason to believe that this may not be the case, and that horizontal eye position, under the control of an efficient optokinetic system, forms the reference. To test this, we measured eye and body movements during foraging excursions under conditions that allowed either good or poor visual stabilization. Results indicate that crabs with good eye stabilization have more accurate home vectors than those with poor eye stabilization, which favors the eyes-as-vector-reference hypothesis.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:15. <b>Shubham Rathore</b><br>Osmotic pressure and eye growth in the larval eyes of the Sunburst diving beetle Thermonectus marmoratus</summary>

<p>rathorst@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Ruby Hyland-Brown; Augusta Jester; Isaac Wolff; Joshua Benoit; Elke Buschbeck (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>For eyes to maintain proper focus during growth, precise coordination of multiple components is required. This includes the lens and tissues that influence the position of the retina. In animals eye growth can be regulated by both genetic control and visual feedback. While both mechanisms have been characterized in vertebrates and some cephalopods, they have been sparsely addressed in arthropods. For the larval eyes of the predacious diving beetle T. marmoratus evidence suggests that this process is predominantly under genetic control, though specifics remain elusive. However, common physiological processes like transient changes in osmotic pressure could be involved, and we hypothesize that this is the case in T. marmoratus based on their eyes elongating extremely rapidly, within just one-hour post molt. We tested this by exposing larvae to a hyperosmotic medium shortly after their molt, with the expectation that this would interfere with proper eye elongation. We then monitored eye growth, assessed eye focus and evaluated potential deficits in hunting behavior. We found that the hyperosmotic treatment indeed leads to relatively shorter therefore hyperopic (far-sighted) eyes. These data suggest that a biologically ubiquitous mechanism for maintaining homeostasis can be leveraged for the precise regulation of tissue growth.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:30. <b>Jennifer Hellmann</b><br>Vertical transmission of horizontally-acquired cues: Implications for transgenerational plasticity</summary>

<p>jhellmann1@udayton.edu</p>
<p>Cassandra Afseth; Andrew Shim; Samantha Anderson; Alison M. Bell (University of Illinois)</p>
<p>There is growing evidence that offspring receive information about their environment vertically from their parents (transgenerational plasticity). At the same time, organisms can gain information about the environment horizontally, from conspecifics. An underexplored possibility is that horizontally-acquired information might be transmitted vertically across generations. For example, non-parents experience predation risk, inducing changes in visual (e.g., antipredator behavior, color) or olfactory (e.g., hormones) cues. If parents detect and respond to those visual or olfactory cues from non-parents, then transgenerational plasticity could be induced even if the parent never experienced predation risk directly. In this study, we provide evidence that horizontally-acquired information can be transmitted vertically across generations. Three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) fathers produced larval offspring with altered antipredator behavior when they received visual and olfactory cues from predator-chased neighbors. Although fathers never saw the predator, changes in offspring traits were similar to those induced by direct paternal exposure to predation risk. These findings suggest that cues gleaned from conspecifics can be transmitted vertically. The implications of simultaneous horizontal and vertical transmission are widely appreciated in disease and culture; our results suggest that they could be equally important for the maintenance of phenotypic variation and information flow within and across generations.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:45. <b>Oluwaseun M. Ajayi</b><br>Sleep deprivation influences blood feeding propensity, host landing and immune gene expression in the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes aegypti</summary>

<p>ajayiom@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Evan S. Smith (University of Cincinnati); Lucas A. Gleitz (University of Cincinnati); Justin M. Marlman (University of Cincinnati); Clément Vinauger (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University); Joshua B. Benoit (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>In insects, sleep deprivation (SD) significantly impacts a diverse range of essential processes including metabolism, reproduction, cognition, and immunity. We have recently established the sleep profiles of mosquitoes, showing the occurrence of more sleep in the nighttime and daytime for day-active and night-active species, respectively. Here, we evaluate how SD impacts some indices of vectorial capacity using behavioral and gene expression assays. Aedes aegypti mosquitoes were subjected to sleep deprivation in the dark phase (where sleep is well consolidated) through the delivery of vibration stimuli, which caused a reduction in blood-feeding propensity (about 54%) and host landing relative to control mosquitoes 4 hours post SD. RNA-seq analysis identified 112 upregulated and 64 downregulated genes in sleep-deprived mosquitoes with respect to those allowed full sleep. Functional enrichment analysis showed an increase in factors associated with defense and immune responses, which are critical for mosquitoes as vectors of pathogenic organisms. Results from this study provide insight into the potential influence of sleep deprivation in mosquitoes on disease transmission.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:00. <b>Kelly Ronald</b><br>A new ‘Canary in the Coalmine’: The house sparrow as a sentinel species for studying the effects of pollution</summary>

<p>ronald@hope.edu</p>
<p>Dr. Gonzalez Pech, Sarah Grimes, Linda Nduwimana, Lindsay Jankowski, Molly McLinden, Olivia Sprys-Tellner, Peyton Hallemann, and Jacob Bergstrom (Hope College)</p>
<p>Urbanization has increased pollution in our cities; this pollution includes both physical particulate matter (PM) and sensory (e.g. noise) pollution. Our lab is interested in exploring the effects of urbanization on an avian model, the house sparrow (Passer domesticus). House sparrows cohabitate around humans and are exposed to the full range of anthropogenic pollutants. We combined both an observational and experimental approach to investigate how the Auditory Brainstem Response is altered with exposure to urbanization and iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs), a main component of PM. We hypothesized that hearing sensitivity would be negatively affected by urbanization level and by exposure to IONPs. Our preliminary results suggest that auditory thresholds (i.e., the lowest level of sound that can be distinguished) are impacted by both an urbanization gradient and exposure to IONPs but that this relationship is frequency-dependent. Our data will inform how avian species are impacted by human activity.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:15. <b>Ruth Simberloff</b><br>Limited communication distance for an urban songbird: functional implications for territory size</summary>

<p>rsimberloff@gmail.com</p>
<p>Jennifer Phillips (Texas A&M University); Graham Derryberry (University of Tennessee); Elizabeth Derryberry (University of Tennessee)</p>
<p>Many studies demonstrate that urban noise interferes with animal communication by masking acoustic signals such as birdsong, but the functional consequences of impaired communication are still not well understood. Although many bird species sing at higher amplitude in noise pollution, communication distance is still reduced in noisy urban soundscapes. Song is a long-distance signal that functions to attract a mate and defend a territory, so a reduction in communication distance could negatively influence a male’s reproductive or competitive success. Reduced territorial success could manifest as more frequent territorial intrusions, reduced territory quality, or reduced territory size. We examined the relationship between communication distance and territory size in white-crowned sparrows (Zonotrichia leucophrys) across an urban-rural gradient in the San Francisco Bay Area in Spring 2021. We mapped the territories of male white-crowned sparrows and calculated territory size as the 95% utilization distribution using a kernel density estimator. We measured the amplitude of each male’s songs as well as background and ambient noise levels on his territory, which we then used to calculate the communication distance of each song. We found the mean communication distance of each individual and assessed its relationship to territory size. the communication distance of a bird’s songs significantly predict his territory size, such that birds with shorter communication distance tend to have smaller territories. This suggests that communication distance may influence the size of songbird territories. This finding strengthens our understanding of the link between communication and its fitness-related functions – an important frontier in the study of birdsong. It also underlines the potential complexity of the impacts of the anthropogenic soundscape upon animal behavior.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:30. <b>Noelia Lander</b><br>Environmental sensing in the unicellular parasite Trypanosoma cruzi</summary>

<p>landernm@ucmail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Miguel Chiurillo, Milad Ahmed, Joshua Carlson, Holland Tolliver, and Aqsa Raja</p>
<p>Trypanosoma cruzi life cycle alternates between a vertebrate host and an insect vector. To survive drastic microenvironmental changes it differentiates into four developmental stages. How the parasite senses these changes and what are the main players in these signal transduction pathways, are some of the questions we seek to answer. 3',5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) is a universal second messenger that mediates cell differentiation in T. cruzi. Adenylyl cyclases (ACs) catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP, while phosphodiesterases (PDEs) remove the intracellular signal. Canonical cAMP effectors (EPAC and PKA) are either absent or cAMP unresponsive in trypanosomes. cAMP response proteins (CARPs) are proposed alternative effectors. We have identified different cAMP signaling players in two microdomains of the parasite: the distal flagellar domain and the contractile vacuole complex. Generating mutant cell lines for the overexpression of ACs, endogenous tagging of putative cAMP effectors and ablation of CARP genes, we found that cAMP plays a role in cell adhesion and osmoregulation, highlighting the importance of this second messenger throughout T. cruzi life cycle. We hypothesize that the contractile vacuole and the flagellar tip of T. cruzi are cAMP signaling domains where it senses osmotic stress and cell contact, triggering cell adhesion and differentiation.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:45. <b>T Christopher Brown</b><br>Critical Period Plasticity Exchanges Neurons Active in Visual Circuitry</summary>

<p>tcbrow12@louisville.edu</p>
<p>AW McGee (University of Louisville)</p>
<p>Abnormal visual experience during a developmental critical period can yield enduring deficits in visual function. Yet how experience-dependent plasticity alters the properties of individual neurons and composition of visual circuitry are unclear. Here we measured with calcium imaging how monocular deprivation during the critical period disrupts binocularity for thousands of neurons in visual cortex. Tracking the tuning properties of nearly a thousand neurons revealed that abnormal vision interconverts monocular and binocular neurons to alter eye dominance through the ratio of monocular neurons. In addition, some neurons more responsive to the deprived eye were silenced and previously unresponsive neurons were recruited. Thus, plasticity during the critical period adapts to recent experience by both altering the tuning properties of responsive neurons and exchanging neurons active in visual circuitry.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>05:00. <b>David J Morris</b><br>Visual Environment and the Evolution of Ornamental Coloring in Habronattus Jumping Spiders</summary>

<p>morri2dd@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Helean Shelton (University of Cincinnati); David Outomuro (University of Pittsburgh); Nathan Morehouse (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>The sensory drive hypothesis predicts that organismal signals and the sensory systems perceiving them will become adapted to local environments under selection to increase signaling efficacy. Courtship signals are particularly interesting because their divergence can lead to reproductive isolation and eventual speciation. Thus, evaluating to what extent sensory drive may be responsible for the evolutionary diversification of courtship signals promises to deepen our understanding of the processes governing speciation. The paradise jumping spiders (genus Habronattus) of North America are an excellent study system for questions of signal divergence and diversification. Males have evolved complex multimodal courtship displays to convince large cannibalistic females that they are mates instead of meals. Visual appearance of male spiders varies greatly between species, perhaps caused by adaptation via sensory drive to the diverse range of habitats that this genus lives in. To test whether male color ornaments have evolved by sensory drive, we collected individuals from two dozen species of Habronattus found in diverse environments across North America. We characterized the light environments of multiple microhabitats per species with a field-portable spectrometer to measure the illuminance and background reflectance. We then measured both male and female spiders’ anterior facing colors using hyperspectral imaging, capturing hundreds of reflectance spectra for each specimen. Finally, we combined these high-throughput reflectance spectra and environmental measurements with Habronattus color vision parameters in a receptor noise limited modeling framework to determine how salient male ornaments are within their native habitats versus those of congeners. Future work will incorporate ornamental salience data and phylogenetic comparative methods to determine whether the relationship between organismal signal and environmental variation has impacted the diversification of genus Habronattus.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>05:15. <b>Rebecca Fuller</b><br>Polyphenisms and polymorphisms: genetic variation in plasticity as a function of lighting environment in bluefin killifish</summary>

<p>rcfuller@illinois.edu</p>
<p>Ben Sandkam, Joe Travis, Katie McGhee, Matt Schrader (University of Louisville)</p>
<p>The presence of stable color polymorphisms within populations begs the question of how genetic variation is maintained. Consistent variation among populations in coloration, especially when correlated with variation in lighting conditions, raises questions about whether lighting conditions affect either the fulcrum of those balanced polymorphisms, the plastic expression of coloration, or both. Color patterns in male bluefin killifish provoke both types of questions. Red and yellow morphs are common in all populations. Blue males are more common in tannin-stained swamps relative to clear springs. Here we combined crosses with a manipulation of light to explore how genetic variation and phenotypic plasticity shape these patterns. We found that the variation in coloration is attributable mainly to two axes of variation: (1) a red-yellow axis with yellow being dominant to red, and (2) a blue axis that can override red-yellow and is controlled by genetics, phenotypic plasticity, and genetic variation for phenotypic plasticity. The variation among populations in plasticity suggests it is adaptive in some populations but not others. The variation among sires in plasticity within the swamp population suggests balancing selection may be acting not only on the red-yellow polymorphism but also on plasticity for blue coloration.</p>

</details>
