<h1>Talks</h1>
<details>
  <summary>09:00. <b>Kristina Fialko</b><br>Building visual signal diversity by discrete modifications of color and motion</summary>

<p>fialko@uchicago.edu</p>
<p>University of Chicago</p>
<p>Color and pattern are often used in conspecific signaling, but these traits are rarely presented statically. Movement in the form of display behavior is often used during communication and should be integrated in analysis of color and pattern. Displays are typically viewed as more malleable than color and pattern because they can be modified to immediate conditions. Here, I assess the extent to which color patches and displays have co-evolved by conducting a comparative study of aggression displays in 12 species of Old World warblers. Using a combination of high-speed videography and stimulated territorial intrusion experiments, I studied the use of wing movements in several different contexts. Contrary to expectation, I found that the major display remains unvaried across species and contexts, despite interspecific variation in quantity and location of color patches Although displays seem to be essentially the same, there are several exceptions that suggest coevolution of display and patch in response to environmental pressures.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:15. <b>Ryan Lunn</b><br>Assessing Canada Goose avoidance behavior to lights tuned to their visual system</summary>

<p>rlunn@purdue.edu</p>
<p>Esteban Fernandez-Juricic (Purdue University); Brad Blackwell  (USDA APHIS)</p>
<p>Birds rely on antipredator behavior to avoid approaching vehicles, like aircraft. When approached by very fast threats such as aircraft, animals must detect and then escape at longer distances to ensure adequate time to avoid an impending collision. One potential solution to increasing the distance at which an animal detects an approaching aircraft is through the use of onboard lighting systems, which have been shown to lead to earlier reactions in some bird species. Importantly, avian vision differs substantially from human vision, particularly in terms of color (wavelength) perception. We used information on the visual system of the Canada Goose to develop a light stimulus of high chromatic contrast, based our knowledge of retinal photoreceptor types, densities, and distribution. Then we ran controlled behavioral experiments, a single-choice test, to understand the responses of Canada geese to lighting treatments (blue, red) and frequencies (steady, pulsing at 2 Hz). Wavelength indeed had a significant effect on the probability avoidance with Canada geese tending to away from the blue light treatment and towards the red light treatment. Additionally, it appears the pulsing light treatment enhanced avoidance response in high ambient light conditions whereas the animals had a higher probability of avoidance in response to the steady light treatment in to the dim ambient light conditions. Our results have implications for onboard lighting design aimed at mitigating bird strikes with the Canada goose, as this species is deemed of high concern due to the safety and economic consequences of bird strikes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:30. <b>Audrey E Miller</b><br>Generating 3-dimensional multispectral models to study dynamic visual signals in animals.</summary>

<p>audreyem@princeton.edu</p>
<p>Benedict G Hogan (Princeton University); Mary Caswell Stoddard (Princeton University)</p>
<p>Animal visual signals are often complex and dynamic. Many visual signals combine aspects of color and pattern with motion in elaborate behavioral displays, adding both spatial and temporal variability to animal color. Despite the recognized importance of spatio-temporal dynamics in animal visual displays, color is frequently treated as a static trait. To understand color signal evolution, it is crucial to capture these spatial and temporal dimensions in our analyses. Technological constraints of current methods limit our ability to analyze colorful visual signals in motion, often leading to the separation of color and behavior in studies of animal signals. Advancements in imaging technologies and the closer integration of fields within ecology and computer science offer new opportunities to characterize dynamic colorful displays in a more comprehensive way. By combining multispectral imaging with photogrammetry and 3D animation, we could analyze these displays in a virtual environment using continuous measures of color that integrate behavior. A key step in developing these virtual methods is creating animatable 3D models with accurate—receiver-specific—color information. Here, we outline a workflow for generating color-accurate 3D models—what we call “3D multispectral models”—and discuss future applications for studying dynamic animal color.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>09:45. <b>Thinh H. Nguyen</b><br>Modeling sensorimotor behavior in echolocating bats with machine learning.</summary>

<p>nguye2t7@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Dieter Vanderelst (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Computational models of animal behavior can test hypotheses and reveal limitations in knowledge or understanding. While simulation is a valuable tool, modeling complex sensory behavior is often complicated by the need to select values for unknown model parameters. Moreover, realistically simulating the sensory input experienced by animals is far from trivial. In our computational work on echolocation in bats, we are currently exploring whether machine learning can aid in automatically selecting parameters for models of sensorimotor behavior. We tasked a simulated agent (bat) with moving around an arena constructed of vegetation-like obstacles and approaching objects labeled as food. We postulated bats can successfully forage by appropriately switching between two sensorimotor loops. Using the current sensory input, a neural network activate the governing sensorimotor loop between the two, allowing for a complex mapping between sensory input and actions. We used reinforcement learning to parametrize the neural network. To ensure the acoustic veracity of our simulation environment, we use acoustic data collected using a physical sonar sensor to supply the simulator with a realistic acoustic model of a complex environment. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using automatic parameter selection in simulation while maintaining the realism of the modeled sensory input.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>01:30. <b>Klara Katarina Nordén</b><br>All that glitters is not gold</summary>

<p>knorden@princeton.edu</p>
<p>Mary Caswell Stoddard (Princeton University)</p>
<p>Some structural colors in nature are frequently described as giving a metallic sheen - for example hummingbird plumage, jewel beetles and Morpho butterflies. The types of structures underlying these colors include thin-films and photonic crystals. While much attention has been focused on describing the often shifting hues of these structures, there has been no attempt to explain why they appear metallic. We argue that the metallic appearance of some structural colors arise from a combination of two factors: a very low diffuse reflection and a colored specular reflection. This type of reflection is found in metals and is distinct from other material reflections in nature. We suggest that some of the ambiguity surrounding the term "iridescent structural color" can be traced to the frequent confounding of metallic colors with another usage of iridescence: a hue shift with viewing angle. Here, we give metallic a precise meaning distinct from a change in hue with viewing angle. We analyze the reflectance of structurally and pigmentary colored bird plumage and show that some structures that fit our definition of metallic are known to vary little in hue with viewing angle, and some structures that are known to exhibit a pronounced hue shift are not metallic. By separating these two aspects, we simultaneously clarify terminology in structural colors and open up many new interesting questions regarding the perception of metallic colors in animals.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>01:45. <b>Justin Remmell</b><br>Inhibition, not excitation, generates functional diversity between OFF-bipolar cells in the mouse retina</summary>

<p>jdremm01@louisville.edu</p>
<p>Bart Borghuis</p>
<p>In the vertebrate retina, bipolar cells transmit visual information from rod and cone photoreceptors to retinal ganglion cells, which then signal this information to central targets in the brain. The murine bipolar cell population comprises 15 distinct cell types based on genetic expression, morphological characteristics, and light-evoked responses. Functional diversity across bipolar cell types is important and establishes parallel signaling pathways – ‘ON’, ‘OFF’, transient, and sustained that are maintained at subsequent synaptic stages. Yet exactly how different the response properties of identified bipolar cell types are, and what the mechanisms are that generate these differences, remains unclear. For example, it is not known how diverse bipolar cell types encode specific aspects of the visual scene such as temporal contrast and ambient light levels (i.e., luminance). Functional divergence of bipolar cell responses may be due to differences in excitatory or inhibitory signaling from presynaptic partners in a luminance-dependent, cell-type specific manner. To investigate this, we utilized an intact, whole-mount preparation and two-photon fluorescence imaging to target two genetically identified OFF bipolar cell types: one reportedly sustained, BC2, and one reportedly transient, BC4 (Syt2_GFP and Htr2a_EGFP transgenic mouse lines, respectively). Luminance-dependent excitatory and inhibitory inputs were measured using whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiological recordings. Light-evoked responses were evoked with visual stimuli at increasing luminance levels. Our data show that the light-evoked excitatory drive on to BC2 and BC4 cells was nearly identical whereas the recorded inhibition on to each type was markedly distinct. This shows that light-evoked inhibition, and not excitation, drives functional diversity between these two bipolar cell types. These results further emphasize the significance of synaptic inhibition in shaping diverse neuronal responses in the early visual system.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:00. <b>Ruma Chatterji</b><br>What is “Front and Center” in a Fiddler Crab’s Spatial Perception?</summary>

<p>chattera@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>John E. Layne (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Path integration is a navigation mechanism whereby animals recall their starting point by continuously measuring distances and directions of their movements which are summed to form a single memory-stored vector. This home vector must be stored using some form of coordinates, which establish a frame of reference for the vector, and thus, the animal. Foraging fiddler crabs return to their burrows using this vector-based navigation strategy. While encoding the vector’s length in memory is conceptually straightforward, encoding its direction requires some reference against which the direction is recorded. Put simply, the open question is, what is “front and center” in an animal’s spatial cognition? The most obvious answer is that the vector’s direction is anchored to the animals’ own body axis, but there is reason to believe that this may not be the case, and that horizontal eye position, under the control of an efficient optokinetic system, forms the reference. To test this, we measured eye and body movements during foraging excursions under conditions that allowed either good or poor visual stabilization. Results indicate that crabs with good eye stabilization have more accurate home vectors than those with poor eye stabilization, which favors the eyes-as-vector-reference hypothesis.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:15. <b>Shubham Rathore</b><br>Osmotic pressure and eye growth in the larval eyes of the Sunburst diving beetle Thermonectus marmoratus</summary>

<p>rathorst@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Ruby Hyland-Brown; Augusta Jester; Isaac Wolff; Joshua Benoit; Elke Buschbeck (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>For eyes to maintain proper focus during growth, precise coordination of multiple components is required. This includes the lens and tissues that influence the position of the retina. In animals eye growth can be regulated by both genetic control and visual feedback. While both mechanisms have been characterized in vertebrates and some cephalopods, they have been sparsely addressed in arthropods. For the larval eyes of the predacious diving beetle T. marmoratus evidence suggests that this process is predominantly under genetic control, though specifics remain elusive. However, common physiological processes like transient changes in osmotic pressure could be involved, and we hypothesize that this is the case in T. marmoratus based on their eyes elongating extremely rapidly, within just one-hour post molt. We tested this by exposing larvae to a hyperosmotic medium shortly after their molt, with the expectation that this would interfere with proper eye elongation. We then monitored eye growth, assessed eye focus and evaluated potential deficits in hunting behavior. We found that the hyperosmotic treatment indeed leads to relatively shorter therefore hyperopic (far-sighted) eyes. These data suggest that a biologically ubiquitous mechanism for maintaining homeostasis can be leveraged for the precise regulation of tissue growth.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:30. <b>Jennifer Hellmann</b><br>Vertical transmission of horizontally-acquired cues: Implications for transgenerational plasticity</summary>

<p>jhellmann1@udayton.edu</p>
<p>Cassandra Afseth; Andrew Shim; Samantha Anderson; Alison M. Bell (University of Illinois)</p>
<p>There is growing evidence that offspring receive information about their environment vertically from their parents (transgenerational plasticity). At the same time, organisms can gain information about the environment horizontally, from conspecifics. An underexplored possibility is that horizontally-acquired information might be transmitted vertically across generations. For example, non-parents experience predation risk, inducing changes in visual (e.g., antipredator behavior, color) or olfactory (e.g., hormones) cues. If parents detect and respond to those visual or olfactory cues from non-parents, then transgenerational plasticity could be induced even if the parent never experienced predation risk directly. In this study, we provide evidence that horizontally-acquired information can be transmitted vertically across generations. Three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) fathers produced larval offspring with altered antipredator behavior when they received visual and olfactory cues from predator-chased neighbors. Although fathers never saw the predator, changes in offspring traits were similar to those induced by direct paternal exposure to predation risk. These findings suggest that cues gleaned from conspecifics can be transmitted vertically. The implications of simultaneous horizontal and vertical transmission are widely appreciated in disease and culture; our results suggest that they could be equally important for the maintenance of phenotypic variation and information flow within and across generations.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>02:45. <b>Oluwaseun M. Ajayi</b><br>Sleep deprivation influences blood feeding propensity, host landing and immune gene expression in the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes aegypti</summary>

<p>ajayiom@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Evan S. Smith (University of Cincinnati); Lucas A. Gleitz (University of Cincinnati); Justin M. Marlman (University of Cincinnati); Clément Vinauger (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University); Joshua B. Benoit (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>In insects, sleep deprivation (SD) significantly impacts a diverse range of essential processes including metabolism, reproduction, cognition, and immunity. We have recently established the sleep profiles of mosquitoes, showing the occurrence of more sleep in the nighttime and daytime for day-active and night-active species, respectively. Here, we evaluate how SD impacts some indices of vectorial capacity using behavioral and gene expression assays. Aedes aegypti mosquitoes were subjected to sleep deprivation in the dark phase (where sleep is well consolidated) through the delivery of vibration stimuli, which caused a reduction in blood-feeding propensity (about 54%) and host landing relative to control mosquitoes 4 hours post SD. RNA-seq analysis identified 112 upregulated and 64 downregulated genes in sleep-deprived mosquitoes with respect to those allowed full sleep. Functional enrichment analysis showed an increase in factors associated with defense and immune responses, which are critical for mosquitoes as vectors of pathogenic organisms. Results from this study provide insight into the potential influence of sleep deprivation in mosquitoes on disease transmission.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:00. <b>Kelly Ronald</b><br>A new ‘Canary in the Coalmine’: The house sparrow as a sentinel species for studying the effects of pollution</summary>

<p>ronald@hope.edu</p>
<p>Dr. Gonzalez Pech, Sarah Grimes, Linda Nduwimana, Lindsay Jankowski, Molly McLinden, Olivia Sprys-Tellner, Peyton Hallemann, and Jacob Bergstrom (Hope College)</p>
<p>Urbanization has increased pollution in our cities; this pollution includes both physical particulate matter (PM) and sensory (e.g. noise) pollution. Our lab is interested in exploring the effects of urbanization on an avian model, the house sparrow (Passer domesticus). House sparrows cohabitate around humans and are exposed to the full range of anthropogenic pollutants. We combined both an observational and experimental approach to investigate how the Auditory Brainstem Response is altered with exposure to urbanization and iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs), a main component of PM. We hypothesized that hearing sensitivity would be negatively affected by urbanization level and by exposure to IONPs. Our preliminary results suggest that auditory thresholds (i.e., the lowest level of sound that can be distinguished) are impacted by both an urbanization gradient and exposure to IONPs but that this relationship is frequency-dependent. Our data will inform how avian species are impacted by human activity.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:15. <b>Ruth Simberloff</b><br>Limited communication distance for an urban songbird: functional implications for territory size</summary>

<p>rsimberloff@gmail.com</p>
<p>Jennifer Phillips (Texas A&M University); Graham Derryberry (University of Tennessee); Elizabeth Derryberry (University of Tennessee)</p>
<p>Many studies demonstrate that urban noise interferes with animal communication by masking acoustic signals such as birdsong, but the functional consequences of impaired communication are still not well understood. Although many bird species sing at higher amplitude in noise pollution, communication distance is still reduced in noisy urban soundscapes. Song is a long-distance signal that functions to attract a mate and defend a territory, so a reduction in communication distance could negatively influence a male’s reproductive or competitive success. Reduced territorial success could manifest as more frequent territorial intrusions, reduced territory quality, or reduced territory size. We examined the relationship between communication distance and territory size in white-crowned sparrows (Zonotrichia leucophrys) across an urban-rural gradient in the San Francisco Bay Area in Spring 2021. We mapped the territories of male white-crowned sparrows and calculated territory size as the 95% utilization distribution using a kernel density estimator. We measured the amplitude of each male’s songs as well as background and ambient noise levels on his territory, which we then used to calculate the communication distance of each song. We found the mean communication distance of each individual and assessed its relationship to territory size. the communication distance of a bird’s songs significantly predict his territory size, such that birds with shorter communication distance tend to have smaller territories. This suggests that communication distance may influence the size of songbird territories. This finding strengthens our understanding of the link between communication and its fitness-related functions – an important frontier in the study of birdsong. It also underlines the potential complexity of the impacts of the anthropogenic soundscape upon animal behavior.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:30. <b>Noelia Lander</b><br>Environmental sensing in the unicellular parasite Trypanosoma cruzi</summary>

<p>landernm@ucmail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Miguel Chiurillo, Milad Ahmed, Joshua Carlson, Holland Tolliver, and Aqsa Raja</p>
<p>Trypanosoma cruzi life cycle alternates between a vertebrate host and an insect vector. To survive drastic microenvironmental changes it differentiates into four developmental stages. How the parasite senses these changes and what are the main players in these signal transduction pathways, are some of the questions we seek to answer. 3',5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) is a universal second messenger that mediates cell differentiation in T. cruzi. Adenylyl cyclases (ACs) catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP, while phosphodiesterases (PDEs) remove the intracellular signal. Canonical cAMP effectors (EPAC and PKA) are either absent or cAMP unresponsive in trypanosomes. cAMP response proteins (CARPs) are proposed alternative effectors. We have identified different cAMP signaling players in two microdomains of the parasite: the distal flagellar domain and the contractile vacuole complex. Generating mutant cell lines for the overexpression of ACs, endogenous tagging of putative cAMP effectors and ablation of CARP genes, we found that cAMP plays a role in cell adhesion and osmoregulation, highlighting the importance of this second messenger throughout T. cruzi life cycle. We hypothesize that the contractile vacuole and the flagellar tip of T. cruzi are cAMP signaling domains where it senses osmotic stress and cell contact, triggering cell adhesion and differentiation.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>04:45. <b>T Christopher Brown</b><br>Critical Period Plasticity Exchanges Neurons Active in Visual Circuitry</summary>

<p>tcbrow12@louisville.edu</p>
<p>AW McGee (University of Louisville)</p>
<p>Abnormal visual experience during a developmental critical period can yield enduring deficits in visual function. Yet how experience-dependent plasticity alters the properties of individual neurons and composition of visual circuitry are unclear. Here we measured with calcium imaging how monocular deprivation during the critical period disrupts binocularity for thousands of neurons in visual cortex. Tracking the tuning properties of nearly a thousand neurons revealed that abnormal vision interconverts monocular and binocular neurons to alter eye dominance through the ratio of monocular neurons. In addition, some neurons more responsive to the deprived eye were silenced and previously unresponsive neurons were recruited. Thus, plasticity during the critical period adapts to recent experience by both altering the tuning properties of responsive neurons and exchanging neurons active in visual circuitry.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>05:00. <b>David J Morris</b><br>Visual Environment and the Evolution of Ornamental Coloring in Habronattus Jumping Spiders</summary>

<p>morri2dd@mail.uc.edu</p>
<p>Helean Shelton (University of Cincinnati); David Outomuro (University of Pittsburgh); Nathan Morehouse (University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>The sensory drive hypothesis predicts that organismal signals and the sensory systems perceiving them will become adapted to local environments under selection to increase signaling efficacy. Courtship signals are particularly interesting because their divergence can lead to reproductive isolation and eventual speciation. Thus, evaluating to what extent sensory drive may be responsible for the evolutionary diversification of courtship signals promises to deepen our understanding of the processes governing speciation. The paradise jumping spiders (genus Habronattus) of North America are an excellent study system for questions of signal divergence and diversification. Males have evolved complex multimodal courtship displays to convince large cannibalistic females that they are mates instead of meals. Visual appearance of male spiders varies greatly between species, perhaps caused by adaptation via sensory drive to the diverse range of habitats that this genus lives in. To test whether male color ornaments have evolved by sensory drive, we collected individuals from two dozen species of Habronattus found in diverse environments across North America. We characterized the light environments of multiple microhabitats per species with a field-portable spectrometer to measure the illuminance and background reflectance. We then measured both male and female spiders’ anterior facing colors using hyperspectral imaging, capturing hundreds of reflectance spectra for each specimen. Finally, we combined these high-throughput reflectance spectra and environmental measurements with Habronattus color vision parameters in a receptor noise limited modeling framework to determine how salient male ornaments are within their native habitats versus those of congeners. Future work will incorporate ornamental salience data and phylogenetic comparative methods to determine whether the relationship between organismal signal and environmental variation has impacted the diversification of genus Habronattus.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary>05:15. <b>Rebecca Fuller</b><br>Polyphenisms and polymorphisms: genetic variation in plasticity as a function of lighting environment in bluefin killifish</summary>

<p>rcfuller@illinois.edu</p>
<p>Ben Sandkam, Joe Travis, Katie McGhee, Matt Schrader (University of Louisville)</p>
<p>The presence of stable color polymorphisms within populations begs the question of how genetic variation is maintained. Consistent variation among populations in coloration, especially when correlated with variation in lighting conditions, raises questions about whether lighting conditions affect either the fulcrum of those balanced polymorphisms, the plastic expression of coloration, or both. Color patterns in male bluefin killifish provoke both types of questions. Red and yellow morphs are common in all populations. Blue males are more common in tannin-stained swamps relative to clear springs. Here we combined crosses with a manipulation of light to explore how genetic variation and phenotypic plasticity shape these patterns. We found that the variation in coloration is attributable mainly to two axes of variation: (1) a red-yellow axis with yellow being dominant to red, and (2) a blue axis that can override red-yellow and is controlled by genetics, phenotypic plasticity, and genetic variation for phenotypic plasticity. The variation among populations in plasticity suggests it is adaptive in some populations but not others. The variation among sires in plasticity within the swamp population suggests balancing selection may be acting not only on the red-yellow polymorphism but also on plasticity for blue coloration.</p>

</details>
<h1>Poster Session 1</h1>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 1: Michael Meece</b><br>Exploring specific infrared light wavelengths for neural recovery</summary>

<p>Elke Buschbeck, Thiane Thiam, Ngozi Okeke</p>
<p>It has previously been shown that long-wavelength light in the near-infrared to infrared range can promote healing of damaged tissue. While poorly understood, this is likely mediated by modulation of metabolic activity relating to the rate of ATP production. Retinal degeneration and recovery are powerful models in which to study this phenomenon. Biochemical assays have shown that 810 nm and 950 nm light can increase or decrease the production rate of ATP respectively. However, the impact of these wavelengths on retinal health has not been assessed. We investigated the recovery of the retina in White (w1118) mutant Drosophila melanogaster following a regime of light-induced damage and subsequent repeated exposure to either 810 nm or 950 nm light. Retinal health was examined electrophysiologically via electroretinography and by investigating the retinal ultrastructure. We found that 810 nm light promoted retinal recovery, whereas 950 nm light impeded recovery. These findings are consistent with previous implications about the importance of ATP in the recovery of damaged tissues and highlight how modulation with highly specific wavelength bands can have very different effects on neural health.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 3: Lauren R. Brunner</b><br>Let’s get physical: Physical Enrichment Alters Male Mouse Perception of Courtship Rejection Vocalizations</summary>

<p>Aejah M. Van Dyke, Tuskegee University; Dr. Laura M. Hurley, Indiana University</p>
<p>Both sensory and motor environmental enrichment (EE) are often employed in laboratory settings in order to improve animal welfare through promoting more naturalistically complex environments. However, few studies have explored the effects of EE on social communication. Here, we evaluate the effects of both social and physical enrichment on the perception of negatively valenced vocal signals in male house mice. During courtship interactions, female mice produce broadband vocalizations (BBVs, or squeaks), which can be associated with courtship rejection. Male mice produce prosocial USVs in courtship interactions and decrease their USV output in response to BBV playback. In this study, we used a 2x2 experimental design in which mice were either in social housing (S+) or isolated housing (S-), and either physically enriched housing (P+), or physically deprived housing (P-) for four weeks, creating four distinct groups with varying levels of social and physical enrichment: S+P+, S+P-, S-P+, and S-P-. Mice then underwent a split cage paradigm in which limited contact with a female mouse was allowed through a plexiglass barrier for fifteen minutes during which they were exposed to 5 minutes of silence (baseline), 5 minutes of BBV playback, and another 5 minutes of silence (recovery). USV production was measured to gauge perception of the BBVs. There was a significant effect of both social and physical enrichment level on baseline USV production, with P+ increasing and S+ decreasing baseline USV production. Mice exposed to physical enrichment, regardless of their social enrichment level, also produced significantly longer USVs than physically deprived mice. Physical enrichment also altered mouse perception of courtship rejection signals and the trajectory of vocal behavior during and after BBV playback, with P+ causing a decreased response to playback and decreased recovery after playback. Surprisingly, social treatment did not significantly affect these measurements, suggesting that physical enrichment powerfully alters mouse perception and vocal production in a social interaction, while social enrichment alone does not.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 5: Tim Elmo Feiten</b><br>What Role does the Concept of Umwelt play in Sensory Ecology?</summary>

<p></p>
<p>Jakob von Uexküll (1864 – 1944) coined the concept of Umwelt to talk about the different worlds experienced by animals according to their specific sensory and motor capabilites. He had an important influence on ethology, partly through the work of Konrad Lorenz, and the term Umwelt is still used today in some fields of biology. I want to find out two things: a) How prevalent is the term Umwelt among sensory ecologists today and what do they take it to mean? b) What role does the subjective experience of animals play for sensory ecology in general? My poster poses these two questions to the scientists present at Sensorium 2022 and serves as a general invitation for dialogue about the status of subjective experience in the study of behavior, sensation, and environments. To provide some more structure for possible conversations, the poster summarizes two main lines of historical disagreement about Uexküll’s thought: Do Umwelten belong to individual organisms or to entire species? And is an Umwelt selected from a larger set of pre-existing elements or is it actively constructed by the living subject?</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 7: Aaron Hamrick</b><br>Olfactory Differences Among Closely Related Cactophilic Drosophila Species</summary>

<p>Stephanie M. Rollmann and John E. Layne</p>
<p>Evolutionary divergence of behavioral traits during adaptation to changes in the environment has been well documented in many animals. This divergence is often manifested in sensory systems, for instance, changes in the available host plants leads to shifts in behavioral preference of the insects that exploit them, and changes in the olfactory system that the insects use to identify and locate them. Some progress has been made in understanding the neural basis of such sensory modifications, both within and between Drosophila species. Shifts in host plants have been shown to correspond with changes in the sensitivity and selectivity of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) to odor cues and/or changes in the number of select subtypes of OSNs. However, the extent to which such changes are lineage-specific, and thus due more to ancestry than to adaptation, remains to be determined. This research examines odorant responses by OSNs in six closely related pairs of Drosophila species from the Drosophila repleta group that feed and breed on cactus. Results indicate marked differences in neurophysiological response from several study species who have shifted host plant preference from the ancestral cactus – prickly pear – to columnar cactus, or to both the ancestral and new type of cactus, i.e., they have become polymorphic.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 9: Sanjay Prasher</b><br>Exploring the factors underlying social competency in foragers using an agent-based model</summary>

<p>Elizabeth A. Hobson, University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>Social connectedness allows animals to benefit from conspecifics (e.g., by gaining valuable information from knowledgeable individuals). Socially competent animals should affiliate more with informed individuals to increase the chances of benefiting from their activity. We used an agent-based model to evaluate how access to a food resource impacts an informed agent’s social centrality when conspecifics have varying degrees of social competence. We modeled foraging on a food patch, which only an informed individual can activate, and tested how attention (probability of perceiving successful foragers), preference (probability of approaching successful foragers), and memory (number of time steps remembered) affected foraging success. To understand whether these parameters may underlie social competency, we compared the foraging success of non-producers and the producer’s strength in a proximity network between simulations with different combinations of parameter values. This modeling approach will serve as a useful tool in understanding the potential cognitive mechanisms underlying social competency and producing predictions for empirical work.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 11: Julia K Vrtilek</b><br>Social Information in the Contact Calls of Common Vampire Bats</summary>

<p>Grace Smith-Vidaurre (Rockefeller University, University of Cincinnati) and Gerald G. Carter (The Ohio State University, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute)</p>
<p>When adult common vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) are socially isolated, they produce contact calls. These calls contain enough information for individual recognition and can attract past food-sharing partners. However, it remains unclear whether vampire bat contact calls also contain other social information. Other bat species have been shown to produce learned vocalizations that convey group identity and allow them to recognize unrelated groupmates. To identify what social information vampire bat contact calls contain, we recorded more than 800,000 contact calls made by 76 individuals from seven colonies. To determine pairwise vocal similarity, we used 27 spectral and temporal measures of calls to classify calls to bats. We then asked whether calls contained three types of social information by testing whether multivariate acoustic distance was predicted by kinship (based on known maternities and 17 microsatellite markers), familiarity (time spent together in captivity), and the strength of social bonds (rate of food sharing). Our preliminary results indicate that call similarity is higher in kin (vs nonkin), pairs from the same wild colony (vs different colonies), nonkin pairs from distant sites housed together in captivity (vs pairs that did not meet), and nonkin that share food (vs nonkin that did not). These results are consistent with vocal convergence during social bond formation.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 13: Patrice Baumhardt</b><br>Wild-type and domesticated Mallard duck vision: Not all it’s quacked up to be.</summary>

<p>, Purdue University Department of Biological Sciences</p>
<p>The use of domesticated avian model species (e.g. Chicken and Pigeon) have been used prevalently in the literature to characterize the vision of all birds within their clade. Over the past few decades, evidence has accumulated revealing there is a large amount of variation in the anatomical and physiological properties between different avian species visual systems. Are model species in the literature representative of their clade or even their own species in its wild-type form? We characterized the visual system of adult Mallard ducks, both in the wild-type form (Anas platyrhynchos) and the domesticated form (Anas platyrhynchos domesticus). We found differences in eye size, visual pigment sensitivity, oil droplet absorbance, and the relative density of the photoreceptors across the retina between the two forms. Behavioral studies are needed to confirm how these visual system characteristics could affect the behavior of the wild-type and domesticated mallard, but our findings indicate that caution is needed when characterizing a wild species’ visual system based entirely on its domesticated form.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 15: T Christopher Brown</b><br>Critical Period Plasticity Exchanges Neurons Active in Visual Circuitry</summary>

<p>AW McGee University of Louisville</p>
<p>Abnormal visual experience during a developmental critical period can yield enduring deficits in visual function. Yet how experience-dependent plasticity alters the properties of individual neurons and composition of visual circuitry are unclear. Here we measured with calcium imaging how monocular deprivation during the critical period disrupts binocularity for thousands of neurons in visual cortex. Tracking the tuning properties of nearly a thousand neurons revealed that abnormal vision interconverts monocular and binocular neurons to alter eye dominance through the ratio of monocular neurons. In addition, some neurons more responsive to the deprived eye were silenced and previously unresponsive neurons were recruited. Thus, plasticity during the critical period adapts to recent experience by both altering the tuning properties of responsive neurons and exchanging neurons active in visual circuitry.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 17: Deniz Korman</b><br>Stereopsis in a miniature world: Modeling the potential for stereopsis in hunting spiders</summary>

<p>Nathan I. Morehouse</p>
<p>The ability to perceive the spatial structure of one's environment is an integral part of vision. As such, most sighted animals possess the ability to extract depth information via their eyes. Yet, our understanding of depth perception is mostly limited to vertebrate, and largely primate systems. Hunting spiders present an opportune system to expand our understanding of depth perception to invertebrates. Equipped with 4 pairs of camera eyes and unmatched spatial resolution for animals their size, hunting spiders can navigate 3D environments, plan detours, and catch prey from a distance with precise lunges. These behaviors require acute spatial information, but we know very little about how these spiders perceive depth. In particular, the use of stereopsis by hunting spiders has been largely dismissed; their closely-positioned eyes (<< 1cm separation) are assumed to limit the utility of binocular disparity. However, binocular disparity is dictated by viewing distance, as well as eye separation, and the common dismissal fails to account for the short distances at which these miniature animals interact with their environment. We modeled the binocular disparity between eye-pairs of different hunting spider families viewing targets at behaviorally relevant distances. Our results indicated that some spider species have visual systems that allow them to utilize stereopsis and obtain precise depth information, whereas others do not have high enough acuity to detect small disparities. In fact, the binocular disparities for the stereoscopic species were comparable to those of toads, another non-primate system known to utilize stereopsis. This is a first step in our ongoing efforts to explain depth perception across hunting spiders through morphological and behavioral studies.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 19: J Raúl Perez-Estrada</b><br>Metabolic activity affects retinal pigment epithelium fate during cell reprogramming</summary>

<p>perezej@miamioh.edu, J. Raúl Perez-Estrada, Jared A. Tangeman, Maeve Proto-Newton, Harshavardhan Sanaka, Byran Smucker, and Katia Del Rio-Tsonis</p>
<p>Metabolism is a network of biochemical reactions that occurs in all organisms. It is necessary to produce the energy and metabolites required by living organisms for biological functions. However, how metabolic activity affects or regulates cellular processes such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and cell reprogramming is not entirely understood. Here, we characterized the reprogramming of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) using RPE explants collected from chicken embryos. RPE is a plastic tissue capable of reprogramming into the retina in the presence of FGF2. Using RNAseq, we found that glycolysis genes were upregulated during reprogramming along with cell proliferation and neural genes. In contrast, RPE-related genes were downregulated in the presence of FGF2, indicating that RPE cells had lost their identity. By manipulating the cell media composition, we found that glucose, glutamine, and pyruvate are carbon sources that can be used by the RPE to be able to reprogram. Glycolysis inhibition blocks RPE reprogramming independently of the carbon source, indicating a requirement of this pathway for RPE reprogramming. Interestingly, induction of oxidative metabolism (OXPHOX) by activation of PDH, promotes an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program that is FGF2 dependent. Supplementation of the medium with N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC), partially redirects RPE to a neural fate when OXPHOX is activated, suggesting OXPHOX might produce an oxidative environment that promotes RPE reprogramming into mesenchyme fate. These findings provide evidence of how metabolism affects the cellular fate of plastic tissues such as RPE. In addition, our results might contribute to understanding RPE-related diseases such as age-related macular degeneration.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 21: Melissa Kelley</b><br>The loss of a microbiome-derived tRNA modification leads to a phenotype that alters predation of the mosquito Aedes aegypti</summary>

<p>Shubham Rathore (University of Cincinnati), Melissa Uhran (University of Cincinnati), Elke K. Buschbeck (University of Cincinnati), Joshua B. Benoit (University of CincinnatiC)</p>
<p>Transfer RNA (tRNA) bring the amino acid to the ribosome during protein synthesis. Chemical modifications to tRNA are required for proper functioning and accurate translation of messenger RNA codons. Modification to the anticodon influences decoding of codons by the tRNA and thus directly affects protein synthesis. Queuosine (Q) is an anticodon modification required for decoding codons of four amino acids. Q is synthesized in bacteria and eukaryotes have enzymes to salvage it from their microbiome. In mosquitoes, the microbiome affects immune response, environmental changes, and reproduction. Given mosquitoes are unable to synthesize Q, we hypothesized that the microbiome is critical to the maintenance of Q levels. Here, we show that growth of mosquito larvae with a microbiome of only E. coli lacking Q (∆queA) leads to lower Q levels in larval tRNA. Furthermore, we demonstrate that there are phenotypic effects on the coloration of ∆queA larvae. Lower Q levels correlate with less pigmentation and likely melanin which is critical to mosquito physiology. Lastly, we evaluate the effects on predation of mosquito larvae by the sunburst diving beetle (Thermonectus marmoratus). Overall, we show that the microbiome composition affects tRNA modification levels which affects phenotypes that alter predation of mosquito larvae.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 23: Zachary Whiddon</b><br>Structural remodeling of peripheral taste neurons is fast and independent of taste cell turnover</summary>

<p>Aaron McGee, Robin Krimm</p>
<p>Taste receptor cells are constantly replaced in taste buds as old cells die and new cells migrate in from a pool of progenitors at the base of each bud. The perception of taste relies on new receptor cells integrating with existing neural circuitry, yet how these new cells connect with a taste neuron is unknown. Do taste neurons seek out new taste cells in the bud? Or is the axonal arbor of taste neurons fixed and taste cells migrate to replace older cells or contact the axon at a new location? We measured the motility and branching of individual taste receptive arbors, the portion of the axon innervating taste buds, over time with two-photon in vivo microscopy. Terminal branches of taste receptive arbors continuously and rapidly remodel within the taste bud. This remodeling is faster than predicted by taste bud cell renewal. However, taste receptive arbors did enter a new taste bud in longitudinal imaging studies lasting 100 days. Surprisingly, ablating new taste cells with chemotherapeutic agents revealed that remodeling of the terminal branches of taste receptive arbors does not rely of the renewal of taste bud cells. Thus, taste buds are innervated by a stable number of taste neurons that are constantly remodeling their branching patterns independent of taste cell turnover. This axonal structural plasticity provides a mechanism for the continuity of function for taste neurons.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 25: Jenny Yi-Ting Sung</b><br>Where, when, and who to court: ecological interactions and facial diversification of four species of syntopic paradise jumping spiders</summary>

<p>David J. Morris, University of Cincinnati; David Outomuro, University of Pittsburgh; Nathan I. Morehouse, University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>During courtship, animals face the challenge of communicating their identity or status to the appropriate audience, e.g., viable, receptive mates. The costs of being misidentified can often be high, ranging from wasted energy and reproductive resources to loss of life, as seen in precopulatory sexual cannibalism in spiders. So what traits do animals rely on to communicate their species identity? In paradise jumping spiders (genus /Habronattus/), males flaunt colorful and distinctive species-specific facial patterns. We hypothesized that male /Habronattus/ faces may contribute to communicating species identity, and these faces may have diversified in response to reinforcement selection. In this study, we characterized the spatiotemporal niche partitioning and male facial patterns of 4 syntopic /Habronattus/ species. We predicted that species with less niche partitioning (i.e., higher likelihood of interspecific interactions) would exhibit greater divergence in male facial patterns. First, we evaluated niche partitioning by quantifying habitat usage, spatiotemporal distribution and overlap, and interactions of spiders at the Edge of Appalachia Nature Preserve, Ohio. Next, we quantified spider facial patterns using hyperspectral imaging techniques. Lastly, we examined the relationship between spatiotemporal niche partitioning and facial pattern divergence. We discuss the results in the context of likely ecological and behavioral reproductive isolation in this syntopic community.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 27: James Whitley</b><br>Integration of Cortical and Tectal Inputs in the Pulvinar Nucleus</summary>

<p>Kierra Mason: ASNB, University of Louisville; Nazratan Naeem: ASNB, University of Louisville; Sean Masterson: ASNB, University of Louisville; Arkadiusz Slusarczyk: ASNB, University of Louisville; Martha Bickford: ASNB, University of Louisville</p>
<p>Across sensory modalities, the segregation of distinct features of the sensory environment into parallel streams of information has proven a fundamental organizing principle. In the pulvinar nucleus (PUL), extensive reciprocal connections with most visual cortical areas and a lack of clearly defined cell types have made it difficult to link its anatomical organization with functional response properties. However, study of the projections from the superior colliculus (SC) to the PUL can provide a starting point for deciphering how anatomically defined components may be differentially involved in the various functions ascribed to the PUL. Using confocal microscopy, we observed a region occupying the caudal medial PUL that received highly convergent, bilateral projections from SC, whereas a region occupying the lateral PUL received only ipsilateral, topographically organized inputs from SC. Additionally, inputs to these anatomically defined regions showed a high degree of convergence with inputs from both layer 5 and layer 6 cortical neurons and displayed unique short term synaptic plasticity. Our results indicate a surprising level of convergence across anatomically defined PUL regions, highlighting its importance in integrating a diversity of visual information.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 29: Dilini Karunappuli Herath Mudiyanselage</b><br>Odorant dose-response curves of Drosophila mojavensis olfactory neurons and the divergence of host preference behavior</summary>

<p>John E. Layne, Stephanie M. Rollmann, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA</p>
<p>Animal habitats may contain heterogeneities in important factors such as the plants that are locally available. Animals that specialize on these plants may encounter different plant-derived sensory cues in different locales. Evolutionary adaptation to different plant cues may result in evolutionary divergence, reproductive isolation, and speciation. Divergent traits include behavioral preference for local plants and sensitivity to plant cues in the peripheral nervous system. The cues and sensations involved are primarily chemical and olfactory, the latter initiated by olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) that express odorant receptor genes. The cactophilic fly Drosophila mojavensis occurs as four geographically isolated populations in the deserts of southwestern North America. Each population is an obligate specialist that feeds and breeds on one of four different cactus species. A model for incipient speciation, D. mojavensis has been studied for their olfactory responses (behavioral and neuro-sensory) to odorants, especially cactus-derived volatiles. This revealed differences between the populations in OSN sensitivity which are hypothesized to have arisen due to variation in receptor expression or amino acid sequence, each of which are major ways for species to evolve divergence in sensory capability and behavior. In the present study we characterize the differential sensitivity – adaptive divergence – of D. mojavensis OSNs to a range of concentrations of stimulus odorants, rather than the more typical single concentration. The resulting dose-response curves provide a more definitive measure, compared to single concentrations, of the amount, direction and even the existence of any potential divergence, indicated by a left- or rightward shift of the curve. Also, the slope of the curve shows the binding affinity of the OSNs, which may provide a hint as to the mechanistic cause of the divergence, e.g., difference in receptor expression levels, difference in receptor amino acid sequences.</p>

</details>
<h1>Poster Session 2</h1>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 2: Thomas Myers</b><br>Diversity or oral sensory neuron types in the trigeminal ganglion.</summary>

<p>Joe Breza - University of Eastern Michigan, Robin Krimm University of Louisville</p>
<p>The trigeminal ganglion is home to somatosensory neurons whose processes innervate the entire head and neck. To date, little is known about somatosensory neuron types that innervate the oral cavity. Here, I recorded from mechanosensitive and thermosensitive neurons innervating the oral cavity. I found that the tongue was innervated by slow adapting (SA) or rapid adapting (RA) based on their response to force, and further categorized by their conduction velocity. A subset of anterior tongue and lip mechanosensory neurons were optogenetically identified as Parvalbumin+ (Pvalb+). Pvalb+ neurons tended to be fast Aβ, rapidly adapting neurons. To examine the innervation patterns of these neurons, I labeled them at different ages and compared their patterns to other known markers for somatosensory types that innervate tongue. Pvalb+ neurons are not visible until later postnatal ages, they innervate most fungiform papillae. Pvalb+ neurons also innervated fewer filiform papillae than both Neurofilament+ and CRGP+ neurons. In addition, they have distinctive morphological characteristics compared to another later appearing somatosensory population innervating the tongue (vGlut3+ neurons). These findings lay the groundwork for understanding sensory innervation of the oral cavity.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 4: Lake Ernst</b><br>Novel insights into lens regeneration using P. watl</summary>

<p>ernstpl@miamioh.edu, Georgios Tsissios, Gabriella Theodoroudis-Rapp, Weihao Chen, Anthony Sallese, Byran Smucker, Junfan Chen, Tom Xu, Sophia Ratvasky, Hui Wang, Katia Del Rio-Tsonis</p>
<p>For over two centuries, researchers have been investigating the mechanisms that facilitate tissue regeneration. Newts are known as ‘champions of regeneration’, since they have a remarkable ability to regenerate many tissues including cardiac, neural, and eye tissues such as the retina and lens regardless of age. Historically, traditional protocols have been utilized to provide insights into lens regeneration such as histology or immunodetection, which requires animal sacrifice and limits tracking of lens regeneration over time using the same animal. In recent years, robust technologies have emerged that aim to provide deeper insights into these processes in vivo. One such technology is Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), an emerging technology that provides detailed, real-time illustrations of these processes in live animals, using light scatter detection software. Using Pleurodeles waltl as a model organism, along with OCT, we were able to obtain accurate 3D in vivo representations of the process of lens regeneration at different ages (larvae, juveniles, and adults). Previous work has shown that newts do not lose their ability to regenerate their lens with age. However, we found that the rate of lens regeneration declines as the animals age. These results are consistent with findings that cell-cycle reentry and clearance of the extracellular matrix (ECM) was delayed at older ages. Our results suggest that while age does not limit regeneration competence, it does impact the rate of regeneration. Further studies in P. watl, including the determination of the role of extracellular matrix remodeling during regeneration will be important in providing clues to this 200-year-old mystery.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 6: Sophia Ratvasky</b><br>The Role of Macrophages in Lens Regeneration</summary>

<p>ratvassc@miamioh.edu, Georgios Tsissios, Anthony Sallese, J. Raul Perez-Estrada, Jared A. Tangeman, Weihao Chen, Byran Smucker, Arielle Martinez, Hui Wang, Katia Del Rio-Tsonis</p>
<p>Purpose: For many decades, scientists have been trying to better understand the fascinating scar-free injury response known as regeneration. Many studies have shown that macrophages are required for successful regeneration across a wide demographic of animals. We aimed to investigate the role of macrophages during lens regeneration in the P. waltl. 
 Methods: To assess how macrophage depletion affects the process of lens regeneration, we targeted macrophages by the use of clodronate liposomes. Intraocular injections of control or clodronate liposomes were performed immediately after lentectomy, and at 2 and 4 dpl. At 30 dpl, eyes were collected, processed, and sectioned to be used for immunohistochemistry. 
 Results: All the macrophage-depleted eyes failed to form a lens. Early macrophage depletion resulted in a significant decrease in cell proliferation, induced an unresolved cellular accumulation, prolonged inflammation, caused a fibrotic-like response as well as abnormalities in extracellular matrix remodeling.
 Conclusion: Macrophages are necessary for lens regeneration and that when depleted, newts sustain a fibrotic response similar to the one observed in humans. Further investigating the cellular and molecular mechanisms behind lens regeneration will contribute many advances to the developmental biology field.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 8: Michaela Rogers</b><br>Paternal exposure to novel predator cues reduces offspring survival in threespined stickleback</summary>

<p>Jennifer Hellmann</p>
<p>Climate change induces rapid changes to the environment such as introducing invasive species. Organisms can cope through transgenerational plasticity (TGP), occurring when parental experiences influence offspring phenotypes. TGP can prime offspring for future environments, but it is less known how parents use sensory cues to detect environmental shifts (i.e. increased predation). Individuals may rely on one cue (e.g. visual, olfactory) or use different cues simultaneously. I exposed threespined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) males to cues of a novel trout predator prior to fertilization for 10 days. I examined paternal behavior pre and post-exposure, and measured MHC expression with qPCR. MHC expression can reflect condition: sticklebacks with high MHC expression have worse condition and more stress. I generated offspring after the last exposure with IVF and tested them for antipredator behavior and survival against a live predator. Fathers exposed to visual cues oriented more to and spent time closer to the novel predator post-exposure on day one; MHC analysis is ongoing. Further, offspring survival decreased if fathers received visual cues. The visual cue was the only cue to elicit a change in paternal behavior and have a transgenerational effect on offspring, suggesting its importance for the recognition of novel predators in sticklebacks.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 10: Amartya Tashi Mitra</b><br>Exploring the architecture of a complex lens</summary>

<p>Shubham Rathore, Elke Buschbeck - University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>One of the most important features of eyes are lenses, structures which focus light precisely onto the retina. The process of lens development is well documented in vertebrates, in which the lens is a cellular structure that grows in layers. However, even though morphologically similar, insect lenses are made of secreted proteins, and how these are integrated to form a functional lens remains relatievely unexplored. To investigate how specific lens proteins contribute to accurate lens construction, we used RNAi to knock down lens3, a key lens protein of the visually guided predatory larvae of sunburst diving beetles, Thermonectus marmoratus. These are the only known extant organism with bifocal lenses, and lens3 is known to be expressed in lens producing cells. Knock-downs lead to cataract-like opacities, as well as deformities in lens architecture which we assess at the ultrasctructural level. Based on optical asessments we find that loss of lens3 affects the sharpness of images produced by isolted lenses, as well as the focusing capabilities of intact larval eyes. Ongoing behavioural studies further asess the potential impact on hunting success. This study represents a first step towards understanding how a complex insect lens is formed to support well-focusing eyes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 12: Dr. Anca Ralescu</b><br>P300-based Brain Computer Interface for the Control of an Assistive Robo</summary>

<p>Madhav Lolla, Sreekar Puchala, Sameer Jadhav, Anh Nguyen, Tian Tan</p>
<p>Brain-computer interface (BCI) systems involving non-invasive Electroencephalography (EEG) are designed to stimulate task-specific electrical signals, analyse, and recognize patterns generated in conjunction with a cognitive task. These patterns can then be used to instruct a physical device (e.g., wheelchairs or robotic systems) to carry out a particular action. Among several BCI paradigms are those based on a positive deflection stimulated and observed in a person's EEG (P300) - generated after they successfully detect a target stimulus presented among concurrent non-target stimuli. While P300-based systems have been employed successfully in spelling tasks, the nature of these experiments facilitates their application in assistive robotic systems designed to carry out tasks such as navigating, grasping, and delivering objects. In this research, we design a P300-based BCI system that can navigate an assistive robot efficiently in an indoor setting. Utilising computer vision, our robot is capable at detecting, identifying objects, grasping, lift, and deliver them to the user. In conjunction with this, we have designed an efficient navigation plan for the robot tailored to the context of target object detection and grasping. We also discuss the implementation of an AI system, a knowledge base of relevant information for objects and locations of interest in the physical space.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 14: Syeda Farjana Hoque</b><br>Haller’s organ functionality is critical for ticks to detect humidity and prevent dehydration</summary>

<p>Syeda Farjana Hoque, Jasmine Kennedy, Melissa Uhran, Melissa Kelley, Evan Smith, Kennan Oyen, Ayesha Benton, Pia U. Olafson, Meghan Liu, Arturo Ledezma Ramírez, Thomas Arya, Shyh-Chi Chen and Joshua B. Benoit</p>
<p>Ticks must be able to move into high humidities for water vapor uptake to replenish water stores. If their humidity sensing is impaired, ticks cannot readily move to high humidities, prompting increased death. Here, we examined the ability of American dog ticks to sense humidity by manipulating the Haller’s organ and how altered humidity detection impacts tick survival. Also, Ir93a (an ionotropic receptor linked to humidity detection) expression was examined in the Haller’s organ location (first legs). Either permanent removal or temporary blocking of the Haller’s organ impairs the ability of ticks to rest in areas with high humidity to maintain hydration. Impaired detection of humidity did not impact tick survival when individuals were held under stable, humid conditions, but variable humidity conditions (wet and dry areas) resulted in reduced survival. This increased mortality is likely a combination of increased dehydration stress and rapid utilization of energy reserves required for water vapor uptake. Ir93a is expressed highly in the first legs, suggesting that this receptor is associated with humidity detection. These studies indicate that the Haller’s organ is likely essential for humidity sensing in ticks and a lack of humidity detection lowers tick survival.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 16: Olivia Harris</b><br>Characterizing color vision in jumping spiders through unlearned behaviors</summary>

<p>Nuthara Jayasinghe, Jala Reed, Nathan Morehouse - University of Cincinnati</p>
<p>Jumping spiders are highly visual predators that rely on high acuity vision to capture prey. They also exhibit a wide variety of colorful signals employed in courtship. Molecular and physiological evidence suggests the existence of di-, tri-, and tetrachromacy across the family, but behavioral experiments have not interrogated the chromatic capabilities of these animals. Traditionally, evidence for color vision had relied on association-based behavioral trials to demonstrate an animal’s ability to discriminate between wavelengths. However, in many animals, including jumping spiders, such paradigms are laborious or inaccessible. To surmount this, we investigated achromatic and chromatic discrimination in two species of jumping spiders using unlearned behavioral responses. To do this, we characterized chromatic and achromatic contrast thresholds using whole-body responses as well as retinal tracking movements to video playback stimuli. This ongoing work is providing critical evidence of the perceptual abilities of these colorful animals.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 18: Milad Ahmed</b><br>Study of cAMP signaling dynamics in Trypanosoma cruzi life cycle</summary>

<p>Miguel Chiurillo and Noelia Lander</p>
<p>The purpose of the current study is to investigate cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling dynamics in Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease. This parasite differentiates into four developmental stages to complete its life cycle within an insect vector and a mammalian host. Consequently, the parasite faces extreme environmental changes. The response to these changes is mediated by signal transduction pathways. cAMP is a universal second messenger and previous studies have shown that cAMP levels increase during T. cruzi metacyclogenesis, suggesting a role in T. cruzi differentiation. We used a genetically encoded red fluorescent cAMP indicator (R-FlincA) to generate a cAMP biosensor cell line in T. cruzi. The PCR amplified R-FlincA was subcloned into the T. cruzi expression vector pTREX-n and constructs were used to transfect T. cruzi epimastigotes. Resistant populations were selected and RFlicA expression was confirmed by western blot. We are currently measuring the intracellular cAMP levels in these cell lines under different experimental conditions, using fluorometry and flow cytometry techniques. Subsequently, we will use this biosensor to identify cAMP signaling domains in different developmental stages of the parasite. We anticipate that our results will provide new insights into the role of cAMP in T. cruzi life cycle.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 20: Kelly E. Fredericksen</b><br>An anatomical study of synaptic connections from the chemosensory cortices to the mediodorsal thalamus</summary>

<p>Chad L. Samuelsen, University of Louisville</p>
<p>The mediodorsal thalamus (MD) processes and communicates information between cortical areas related to attention, valuation, and stimulus-outcome associations. Recently, we showed that neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus encode the sensory and affective properties of intraorally delivered odors, tastes, and odor-taste mixtures. Although traditional tract-tracing studies show that projections from the primary chemosensory cortices for smell and taste (piriform cortex (PC) and gustatory cortex (GC), respectively) overlap in the mediodorsal thalamus, the proportions of neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus that receive direct projections from these cortical areas remains unclear. Using an intersectional viral approach, we found that a greater proportion of neurons in the mediodorsal thalamus receive synaptic connections from the gustatory cortex than from the piriform cortex. Next, we sought to determine the role of the mediodorsal thalamus in consummatory choice. Using a two-bottle brief-access task, we measured preferences for previously experienced odors, tastes, and odor-taste mixtures. Pharmacological inactivation (NBQX) of mediodorsal thalamus significantly reduced consumption during both the odor and taste sessions and eliminated the experience-dependent odor preference for the saccharin paired odor. These anatomical and behavioral findings corroborate that the mediodorsal thalamus plays a key role in the multisensory flavor processing that guides ingestive behaviors.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 22: Sophia Clemen</b><br>Testing for individually-recognizable vocal signatures in Northern Bobwhite quail</summary>

<p>Sanjay Prasher (graduate student), Claire O’Connell (graduate student), Elizabeth Hobson (principal investigator)</p>
<p>The Northern Bobwhite quail, Colinus virginianus, is a species of great conservation concern, with Ohio populations experiencing greater than a 97% decrease in numbers since the 1970’s. Wild populations in Ohio are currently monitored with automated sound recording units. Our goal is to test whether male “bob-white” calls are individually distinctive and could be used to better estimate population sizes, habitat fidelity, and movement patterns. Previous studies have shown that Bobwhite quail differ in the structure of their separation calls, but whether the loud territoriality calls are individually distinctive is unknown. To test this, we recorded calls from 12-20 male Bobwhite which were placed in individual sound recording chambers. We analyzed: (1) whether male “bob-white” calls were consistent within individuals and (2) whether calls were distinctive across individuals. We analyzed characteristics of call spectrograms using the R package warbleR. Results of this study could have strong conservation implications and could be used to better understand and manage threatened populations of wild quail.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 24: Joshua Carlson</b><br>Study of putative cAMP effectors in Trypanosoma cruzi</summary>

<p>Aqsa Raja, Miguel Chiurillo, and Noelia Lander (Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati)</p>
<p>Chagas disease is endemic in the Americas where it affects 8 million people, with no vaccines or effective treatments for the chronic phase of the disease. Its etiological agent, Trypanosoma cruzi, is a protozoan parasite with a complex life cycle, involving a mammalian host and an insect vector. In response to microenvironmental changes, T. cruzi differentiates into four developmental forms. Signaling cascades, including the cAMP pathway, sense these changes and trigger parasite differentiation. Canonical cAMP effectors are either absent or cAMP unresponsive in trypanosomes. Studying putative cAMP effectors is crucial to elucidate the role of this pathway in environmental sensing. In this study we are investigating the role of four putative cAMP effectors in T. cruzi: cAMP response proteins 1 and 3 (CARP1, CARP3), a regulatory subunit of Protein Kinase A-like protein (PKAr-like), and Flagellar Membrane Protein 6 (FLAM6). Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology we generated mutant cell lines where each protein was endogenously tagged, and CARPs were knocked out. Gene editing and protein expression was verified by PCR and western blot, while localization was analyzed by confocal microscopy. Further characterization of mutants is currently in progress. Our results will provide key information on the possible role of cAMP effectors in trypanosomes.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 26: Robert Lundy</b><br>Central Amygdala Somatostatin Expressing Neurons Projecting to NST are GABAergic</summary>

<p>Jane Bartonjo</p>
<p>The nucleus of solitary tract (NST) and parabrachial nucleus (PBN) represent the first and second central synapses of ascending gustatory information. Neural processing in these nuclei is influenced by descending input from forebrain regions such as the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA). In mice, we have shown that somatostatin (Sst) expressing neurons of CeA (CeA/Sst) that project to NST and PBN are largely distinct cell populations and optogenetic inhibition of the CeA/Sst-to-NST subpopulation increases the intake of high concentrations of quinine, a taste stimulus that is usually considered aversive. The synaptic connectivity of this cell population is required to understand the possible mechanisms underlying these behavioral responses. Our lab has previously demonstrated that CeA/Sst terminals within the PBN expressed GABA and made synaptic contacts, largely, with non-GABAergic neural elements. To determine whether CeA/Sst terminals within the NST also express GABA, we used electron microscopy combined with cre-dependent anterograde transported virus injections (AAV9-DIO-dApex2) into the CeA of Sst-cre mice and post-embedding immunogold labelling for GABA. We found that majority of CeA/Sst terminals in NST express GABA and synapsed with non-GABAergic neural targets. These results suggest that CeA/Sst cells provide monosynaptic input to second order NST projection neurons (non-GABAergic) and this direct feedback inhibition is necessary for appropriate responding to bitter taste quality.</p>

</details>
<details>
  <summary><b>Poster 28: Morgan Chaney</b><br>Modeling the application of laser bird deterrents to estimate the potential risk of eye injury to a bird</summary>

<p>chaneym@purdue.edu, Greg Gallagher, Ball State University; Jeffrey Lucas, Purdue University; Esteban Fernandez-Juricic, Purdue University</p>
<p>Laser bird deterrents are being promoted as a safe alternative to many of the deterrents currently available on the market, but research regarding their safety is limited. Previous work has shown that a class IV laser deterrent can cause ocular damage in European starlings and house sparrows under controlled conditions, but this was dependent on the laser exposure time. Here, we developed a model to predict the amount of time a bird is exposed to the laser in the field (i.e., agricultural plots), taking into consideration the speed of the laser and bird movements, bird eye diameter, and laser properties (divergence, beam diameter). We made our model species-specific by focusing the bird parameters on European starlings. Our model shows that predicted exposure times can range from approximately 4ms to 330ms for distances up to 500 meters away. The exposure times increased when the bird and laser were traveling in the same direction and their speeds were similar to each other. This predictive framework can allow us to further explore probability of laser exposure and the potential risks associated with it.</p>

</details>
